
--- PAGE 1 ---
Quantum Chemistry in the Age of Quantum Computing
Yudong Cao,†,‡Jonathan Romero,†,‡Jonathan P. Olson,†,‡Matthias Degroote,†,¶,§
Peter D. Johnson,†,‡Mária Kieferova ́,||,⊥,‡Ian D. Kivlichan,#,†Tim Menke,#,⊗,△Borja Peropadre,‡
Nicolas P. D. Sawaya,∇Sukin Sim,†,‡Libor Veis,◆and Ala ́n Aspuru-Guzik *,†,‡,¶,§,○,□
†Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, United States
‡Zapata Computing Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, United States
¶Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1Z8, Canada
§Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1Z8, Canada
||Department of Physics and Astronomy, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia
⊥Institute for Quantum Computing and Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario N2L
3G1, Canada
#Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, United States
⊗Research Laboratory of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, United States
△Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, United States
∇Intel Laboratories, Intel Corporation, Santa Clara, California 95054 United States
◆J. Heyrovsky ́Institute of Physical Chemistry, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic v.v.i., Dolej ̌skova 3, 18223 Prague 8,
Czech Republic
○Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1Z8, Canada
□Vector Institute for Arti ﬁcial Intelligence, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1M1, Canada
ABSTRACT: Practical challenges in simulating quantum systems on classical
computers have been widely recognized in the quantum physics and quantumchemistry communities over the past century. Although many approximation methodshave been introduced, the complexity of quantum mechanics remains hard to appease.The advent of quantum computation brings new pathways to navigate this challengingand complex landscape. By manipulating quantum states of matter and takingadvantage of their unique features such as superposition and entanglement, quantumcomputers promise to e ﬃciently deliver accurate results for many important problems
in quantum chemistry, such as the electronic structure of molecules. In the past twodecades, signi ﬁcant advances have been made in developing algorithms and physical hardware for quantum computing,
heralding a revolution in simulation of quantum systems. This Review provides an overview of the algorithms and results thatare relevant for quantum chemistry. The intended audience is both quantum chemists who seek to learn more about quantumcomputing and quantum computing researchers who would like to explore applications in quantum chemistry.
CONTENTS
1. Introduction and Historical Overview 10857
2. Quantum Chemistry in the Age of Quantum
Computing 10860
2.1. Basics and Challenges of Classical Quantum
Chemistry 10860
2.2. Classical Methods: Approximation Techni-
ques and Their Limitations 10861
2.2.1. Static Properties: Wave Functions and
Energy Spectra 10861
2.2.2. Dynamical Properties: Time Evolution
of the Wave Function 10862
2.3. Quantum Methods: Going beyond Classical
Limitations Using Quantum Computers 108642.3.1. Static Properties: Phase Estimation and
Variational Quantum Eigensolvers 10865
2.3.2. Dynamical Properties: Hamiltonian Sim-
ulation and Hybrid Methods 10866
3. Computational Complexity 10866
3.1. Complexity Classes 108673.2. Complexity Theory of the Electronic Struc-
ture Problem 10867
3.3. Complexity Theory in Molecular Vibronics 10868
4. Quantum Simulation Algorithms for Fault-Toler-
ant Quantum Computers 10869
4.1. Quantum Algorithms for Energy Estimation 10870
Received: January 2, 2019
Published: August 30, 2019Review
pubs.acs.org/CR Cite This: Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −10915
© 2019 American Chemical Society 10856 DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −10915
Downloaded via COPENHAGEN UNIV LIBRARY on March 30, 2026 at 13:19:14 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.


--- PAGE 2 ---
4.1.1. General Hamiltonian Simulation 10870
4.1.2. Quantum Phase Estimation (QPE) 108734.1.3. Quantum Fourier Transform (QFT) 10874
4.2. Determining the Ground-State Energies of
Quantum Chemistry Hamiltonians 10875
4.2.1. State Preparation 108754.2.2. Hamiltonian Simulation for Quantum
Chemistry 10876
4.2.3. Measuring Properties of Many-Body
Systems 10878
5. Quantum Algorithms for Noisy Intermediate-
Scale Quantum Devices 10878
5.1. Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE)
Algorithm 10879
5.1.1. Ansatzes for State Preparation 10879
5.1.2. Energy Estimation in VQE 10887
5.1.3. Optimization Methods 108895.1.4. Physical Realizations of VQE 108915.1.5. VQE for Excited States 108915.1.6. Calculation of Molecular Properties
with VQE 10892
5.2. Other Hybrid Quantum −Classical Algo-
rithms for Chemistry 10893
5.2.1. Variational Quantum Simulator 108935.2.2. Imaginary-Time Variational Quantum
Simulator 10893
5.2.3. Imaginary-Time Variational Quantum
Simulator for Excited States 10893
5.3. Non-Gate-Based Methods for Quantum
Chemistry 10893
5.3.1. Adiabatic 108935.3.2. Linear Optics 10894
6. Summary and Outlook 10895Appendices 10897
A. Quantum Chemistry Basis Sets 10897B. Mappings to Qubits 10898
B.1. Jordan −Wigner Mapping 10898
B.2. Bravyi −Kitaev Mapping 10899
C. From Quantum Chemistry to Quantum
Computation: Example of Molecular Hydro-gen 10899
C.1. Introduction 10899C.2. De ﬁning the Chemistry Problem 10900
C.3. Mapping the Problem 10900C.4. A Brief Introduction to Quantum Compu-
tation 10901
C.5. Variational Quantum Eigensolver for
Quantum Chemistry 10901
Author Information 10902
Corresponding Author 10902ORCID 10902Notes 10903Biographies 10903
Acknowledgments 10903Glossary 10904
Section 2 Terms 10904Section 3 Terms 10904Section 4 Terms 10904Section 5 Terms 10905Appendix Terms 10905
References 109051. INTRODUCTION AND HISTORICAL OVERVIEW
Since the advent of electronic computers in the past century,
computation has played a fundamental role in the development
of chemistry. Numerical methods for computing the static anddynamic properties of chemicals have revolutionized chemistry
as a discipline. With the recent emergence of quantum
computing, there is potential for a similarly disruptive progress.This Review provides a comprehensive picture of the currentlandscape of quantum computation for chemistry to help
establish a perspective for future progress.
Where can quantum computers help chemistry? As our
understanding of quantum computers continues to mature, so
too will the development of new methods and techniqueswhich can bene ﬁt chemistry. For now, at least, we are
conﬁdent that quantum computers can aid those quantum
chemistry computations that require an explicit representation
of the wave function, either because of a high accuracyrequirement of simulated properties or because of a high
degree of entanglement in the system. In these cases, the
exponential growth of the dimension of the wave functionmakes manipulation and storage very ine ﬃcient on a classical
computer. Indeed, for even moderately large systems, it is
already intractable to explicitly maintain the full wave function.
As both the quantum hardware and software communities
continue to make rapid progress, the immediate role of
quantum computing for quantum chemistry becomes clearer.While it seems that there will be no shortage in the demand fornew classical methods, the replacement of speci ﬁc classical
subroutines with quantum computations can improve the
accuracy and tractability of chemical predictions. This alsobrings up a new challenge: advancing quantum algorithms for
quantum chemistry requires the synergy of quantum
information theory and classical quantum chemistry techni-ques. While these two areas are closely related, they haveevolved following di ﬀerent disciplines the former from
physics and computer science, and the latter from chemistry.
In this Review, our aim is to be pedagogical to scientists fromeach background in order to bridge this gap and stimulate new
developments. We will describe how quantum computing
methods can be used to replace or augment classical quantumchemistry methods and survey an array of state-of-the-artquantum computing techniques that may, one day, become as
common-place as density functional theory.
Quantum computers are quantum systems which can be
initialized, su ﬃciently controlled, and measured, in order to
perform a computational task.
1There are many candidate
physical realizations of quantum computers.2Promising
proposals include ion traps,3−7superconducting architec-
tures,8−12quantum optics,13−16nitrogen vacancy centers,17−19
nuclear magnetic resonance,20−22topological qubits,23,24
neutral atoms25−29and quantum dots.30−33As will be done
in this Review, it is convenient to abstract the description of
the computation away from the particular physical implemen-tation. However, for a concrete example in the case of ion trap
quantum computing, one approach is to use trapped Ca
+ions
as qubits.34The quantum computation consists of trapping the
ions in an array, altering the valence-electron collectivequantum state of the ions with a series of precise laser pulses,
and measuring the occupation of two Zeeman states of the s
anddorbital manifolds in each ion. Instead of referring to the
energy levels of trapped ions, we refer to the parts of an
abstract quantum computer, namely, interactions between two-Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510857


--- PAGE 3 ---
level quantum systems called quantum bits or qubits . Instead of
laser pulses, the operations on an abstract quantum computerare unitary transformations. After a sequence of unitarytransformations, each qubit is measured, returning a binaryoutcome which is labeled “0”or“1”.
A classical computation process can be broken down into
elementary logical operations, such as AND, on a few bits at atime. Similarly, controlled local unitary operations, calledquantum gates , can be used as elementary operations to be
applied on quantum bits. The novelty of quantum computingis derived from processes which “entangle ”the qubits. Just as
atomic orbitals fail to appropriately describe molecular
electronic wave functions, entangled qubits cannot be
independently assigned de ﬁnite quantum states. In designing
a sequence of quantum gates (called a quantum circuit )t o
output the solution to a problem, entangling quantum gatescan a ﬀord shortcuts. A process for constructing a quantum
circuit designed to solve a particular problem is called aquantum algorithm . Just like a classical algorithm, the
performance of a quantum algorithm is characterized by thenumber of elementary operations and the run time as afunction of the problem instance size (e.g., the number of basisset functions used in the calculation).
A number of quantum algorithms have been invented which
stand to outperform their classical counterparts.
35−39With
regard to chemistry, these include algorithms for estimating theground-state energies of molecular Hamiltonians40−42and
computing thermal rate constants.43Existing quantum
computers have yet to solve instances of problems which are
intractable for classical computers. However, the pace of
progress bears promise for achieving this feat11,13,44,45and is
certain to drive the discovery of new useful quantumalgorithms.
The idea of quantum computing originated in the 1980s,
when Manin46and Feynman47independently described a
vision for using quantum mechanical systems to perform
computation. Both argued that simulating quantum mechanicson classical computers requires resources growing exponen-tially in the problem instance size, so that certain problems willremain out of reach, regardless of the ingenuity of thealgorithm designers. It is not true that all quantum mechanicalsystems are di ﬃcult to simulate; some of them have easily
computable exact solutions, and others have very clevercomputational shortcuts that lead to approximate solutions.However, simulation of a general quantum mechanical system
has proven to be di ﬃcult. A quantum computer, as envisioned
by Feynman and Manin, can potentially circumvent theroadblock of exponential cost by being quantum mechanicalitself.
During the same decade, there were also developments of
abstract models of quantum mechanical computation by
Benio ﬀ
48and Deutsch,49raising the still-open question of
“what are the problems for which quantum computers can
have a speed-up over the best-known classical algorithms? ”
Motivated by this question, researchers in the 1990s developedseveral quantum algorithms of major importance.35−40,50
These algorithms not only solve their respective problems
with a provable speed-up over the best known classicalcounterparts but also provide meaningful frameworks fordeveloping subsequent quantum algorithms. We refer thereader to the review by Childs and van Dam
51for a
comprehensive treatment of the algorithm developments
prior to 2011.This Review will focus on the subset of quantum algorithms
for solving problems in chemistry. In 1996, Feynman ’s vision
was manifested in a theoretical proposal by Lloyd,50providing
a concrete method for using quantum computers to e ﬃciently
simulate the dynamics of other quantum systems. Around thesame time, Wiesner52and Zalka53also suggested using
quantum computers for simulating the dynamics of many-
body systems.
The general set of techniques for using a quantum computer
to simulate another quantum system falls under the name ofHamiltonian simulation .B r o a d l ys p e a k i n g ,f o rag i v e n
Hamiltonian H, Hamiltonian simulation is an e ﬃcient and
accurate implementation of e
−iHtusing elementary operations
that can be executed on a quantum computer. Since these earlyworks in the 1990s, Hamiltonian simulation has grown to bean important sub ﬁeld of quantum computing, o ﬀering many
valuable insights toward the development of further quantumalgorithms. As a prominent example, the ability to e ﬃciently
perform Hamiltonian simulation is used in conjunction withanother technique known as the quantum phase estimation
algorithm (QPEA)
54for eﬃciently obtaining the eigenenergies
and eigenstates of a quantum system.40
The ﬁrst quantum algorithms suited particularly for
quantum chemistry appeared as early as the late 1990s.These include, for instance, simulating fermionic Hamilto-nians
55and the quantum algorithm for calculating thermal rate
constant e ﬃciently.43The opening decade of the 21st century
witnessed the ﬁrst quantum algorithms for quantum chemistry
built on the insights of QPEA, for example, the quantum
algorithms developed for computing molecular spectra with
exponential speed-up over classical computers.41,42The basic
idea of this work is to use Hamiltonian simulation techniquesto eﬃciently simulate the dynamics of a quantum molecular
Hamiltonian and apply QPEA to extract the eigenenergies.Since these initial contributions, a ﬂurry of results have
appeared in the literature which address quantum chemistryproblems of various forms. The quantum computational costof these algorithms has continued to be reduced.
56−59
However, practical implementation of these algorithms is
widely believed to be decades away because they require
scalable, error-corrected quantum computers. This perspectivehas driven researchers to ask, “What are the problems we can
address with near-term quantum computers of moderate sizeand without error correction? ”Such devices are increasingly
referred to as noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ)devices.
60
This question has led to the new paradigm of variational
quantum algorithms (described in sections 5.1 and5.2). The
approach has attracted substantial attention61−69from both the
theoretical62,63,66and experimental communities61,64,65,67−69in
quantum computing. In short, variational quantum algorithmsutilize a hybrid approach involving a quantum computer and aclassical computer working in tandem. Unlike the algorithmsbased on QPEA, which require the quantum computer toperform a long sequence of operations, in the variationalquantum algorithm framework the quantum computer only
needs to perform a short sequence of operations. In this way,
the shortcomings of present-day hardware are partly circum-vented.
With variational quantum algorithms, each operation has
parameters which can be set by the classical computer. Hencethe quantum computer can be regarded as a machine which
produces states |ψ(θ⃗)⟩lying on a manifold determined by theChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510858


--- PAGE 4 ---
classical parameters θ⃗. The machine then measures these states
in the computational basis. This is useful, for instance, for the
estimation of the ground-state energy of some Hamiltonian
H.61For each state, we measure the expectation ⟨ψ(θ⃗)|
H|ψ(θ⃗)⟩with respect to the Hamiltonian H. We then use the
classical computer to tune θ⃗to minimize this energy
expectation. By o ﬀ-loading a portion of the computation to a
classical computer, a variational quantum algorithm is a farmore practical alternative to its QPEA-based counterparts. A
diverse set of experimental groups worldwide have already
implemented various variational quantum algorithms on their
physical systems.
61,64,65,67,68,70−72
The quantum algorithms discussed so far fall within the
standard gate model of quantum computing, meaning they can
always be described by a sequence of quantum gates which
manipulate the quantum state of a register of qubits. In parallelto the developments in the gate model, there are other models
of quantum computation that are also relevant for chemistry
applications. Two important models are adiabatic quantum
computing (AQC) and the Boson sampling model . The basic
principle underlying AQC is the adiabatic theorem of quantum
mechanics.
73Suppose we initialize a quantum system as the
ground state of some Hamiltonian H0and slowly evolve the
Hamiltonian to some other Hamiltonian H1via a linear
interpolation H(s)=( 1 −s)H0+sH1,s∈[0,1]. Assuming
there is always a gap between the ground state of H(s) and the
ﬁrst excited state, the end of the adiabatic evolution of the state
of the system should be close to the ground state of H1. The
approach of AQC is to initialize a quantum system accordingto some Hamiltonian H
0whose ground state is easy to prepare
and verify, and choose H1such that preparing its ground state
is equivalent to solving a hard computational problem.Extensive e ﬀorts have been made in developing AQC, and
progress in the ﬁeld has also been thoroughly reviewed in the
literature.74
The AQC model has been shown to be computationally
equivalent to the gate model,75meaning that algorithms
written in either model can be translated to ones in the other
model without incurring prohibitive computational overhead.In contrast, the Boson sampling model of computation does
not have this property.
76However, it does give rise to a class of
sampling problems77which are hard to solve on a classical
computer. This model is discussed in more detail in section 3.3
Apart from quantum computation, another related inter-
section between computer science and quantum physics, whichhas become relevant to quantum chemistry, is quantum
computational complexity theory. Well-known problems in
quantum chemistry have been characterized in terms of theirquantum computational complexity by taking advantage of the
rigorous machinery developed in theoretical computer science
for determining the worst-case hardness of a computationalproblem. Examples include ﬁnding the universal functional in
density functional theory,
78ﬁnding the globally optimized
Hartree −Fock wave function,78solving the N-representability
problem,79and calculating the density of states of quantum
systems.80These characterizations, discussed in section 3 ,
provide further motivation for the development of quantumalgorithms targeted at solving them. A comprehensive review
81
of relevant results has been presented in the literature, which
can be a useful resource for interested readers.
The remainder of the Review is organized as follows. We
have provided a dependency graph of the sections and
subsections in Figure 1 .I n section 2 we outline several
important computational roadblocks in quantum chemistry,
Figure 1. Graphical illustration of the dependency between the subsections of this Review. Each dashed box corresponds to a section, and each
node on the graph corresponds to a subsection. In general the materials are organized in a tree structure, with more details being covered in later
sections. We broadly divide the subjects into computational complexity ( section 3 ) and algorithmic techniques ( sections 4 and5). In particular, the
sections on algorithms are further divided into methods suited for fault-tolerant quantum computers (FTQC), as covered in section 4 , and noisy
intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) devices,60covered in section 5 .Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510859


--- PAGE 5 ---
describe state-of-the-art classical methods which grapple with
these issues, and then introduce quantum algorithms whichmay resolve them. In section 3 we assess the computational
hardness of classical and quantum algorithms for chemistryfrom the perspective of computational complexity. Section 4
provides a more detailed description of the state-of-the-artquantum algorithms for quantum chemistry for fault-tolerantquantum computation. Section 5 describes the approaches that
are suitable for calculations on present-day quantum hardware.We conclude with a summary and outlook in section 6 .I n
Appendix C , we give a hands-on demonstration of how to
calculate a dissociation curve of H
2with a quantum algorithm.
Due to the vast amount of notations, symbols, andnomenclatures introduced throughout this Review, we providea glossary organized by section (including the Appendices) for
terminologies used inside each respective section.
2. QUANTUM CHEMISTRY IN THE AGE OF QUANTUM
COMPUTING
A fundamental goal of quantum chemistry is to solve the time-
independent, non-relativistic Schro ̈dinger equation for molec-
ular systems,
ψψ̂⃗⃗=⃗ H rr t E r t() (, ) (, )mol (1)
where Ĥmolis the molecular Hamiltonian, ψ(r ⃗,t) is the multi-
particle wave function of the system, and Eis the energy
eigenvalue. In atomic units, the molecular Hamiltonian is givenby
∑∑∑
∑∑̂=−∇
−∇
−
|⃗−⃗|
+
|⃗−⃗|+|⃗−⃗|⃗ ⃗
>>HMZ
Rr
ZZ
RR rr22
1iR
i ir
iji
ij
ij iij
ij ij i ijmol2 2
,
,,ii
(2)
where R ⃗i,Mi, and Ziindicate the spatial coordinates, masses,
and charges of the nuclei in the molecule and r ⃗iare the
electronic coordinates. However, an exact solution quicklybecomes intractable due to the exponential growth of the sizeof the wave function with the particle number.
82This has
inspired formulations of various physically motivated wavefunction approximations as well as quantum chemistryalgorithms on classical computers. This section starts with alook at challenges as such and discusses how classical
computers may fall short in addressing some of the challenges
while quantum computers are able to circumvent thelimitations. The dependency among the subsections is showninFigure 1 . In order to facilitate the discussion, we partition
the problem space into static and dynamic problems. Static
problems are associated with computing the spectrum of theHamiltonian, most notably the ground state.
2.1. Basics and Challenges of Classical Quantum
Chemistry
As an approach to solve the Schro ̈dinger equation, which is
comprised of a coupled set of di ﬀerential equations, the most
common strategy is to introduce a complete set of independent
functions, a basis set , to describe the physical wave function of
the system. Although this does not resolve the exponentialincrease of parameters with system size, it allows the balancingof computational resources with accuracy.
The full molecular Hamiltonian consists of terms associated
with electrons and nuclei as well as the interactions betweenthem. Because the mass of a nucleus is 3 orders of magnitude
greater than that of an electron, a common simplifyingassumption made in quantum chemistry calculations, called theBorn−Oppenheimer approximation (BOA), treats the nuclei as
stationary point charges. The problem is then transformedsuch that it only involves electrons moving in a stationarypotential due to the nuclei. The molecular Hamiltonian is splitup into a nuclear part and an electronic part:
̂=̂⃗+̂⃗⃗ H HR H R r () (, )mol nucl elec (3)
The wave function equally can be separated into a nuclear part
and an electronic part:
ψ ϕχ⃗⃗=⃗⃗⃗ Rr R Rr(, ) () (, )nucl elec (4)
such that for every nuclear con ﬁguration R ⃗, a separate
electronic eigenvalue problem,
χχ̂⃗⃗=⃗⃗⃗ H Rr E R Rr(, ) () (, )elec elec elec elec (5)
needs to be solved. When the BOA is valid, the Hamiltonian of
interest to quantum chemistry is
∑∑ ∑̂=−∇
−
|⃗−⃗|+|⃗−⃗|⃗
>HZ
Rr rr 21
ir
iji
ij ij i ijelec2
,,i
(6)
The electronic degrees of freedom in ﬂuence the nuclear
motion through the appearance of the energy in the nucleareigenvalue equation:
ϕϕ ̂+⃗⃗=⃗ HE R R E R( () ) () ()nucl elec nucl nucl (7)
where Eis now the full molecular energy as in eq 1.
Although in recent times there has been signi ﬁcant e ﬀort to
treat chemistry calculations without the BOA,83−86in this
Review we focus on treating quantum chemistry problemswithin this regime. However, we note that though most of theapplications are for cases within the BOA, some of the previousformalisms have been combined with phase estimation to treatnon-BOA cases.
87Quantum simulation in ﬁrst quantization
can be readily applied to non-BOA instances as well.88,89
For systems of electrons, one common methodology to
avoid treating the size of the full many-electron wave functionis density functional theory (DFT).90,91All degrees of freedom
of the electronic system are integrated out, except for thedensity. However, the quality of DFT depends on the chosenexchange-correlation functional. There have been severaleﬀorts to improve DFT functionals systematically (e.g.,
GGA, meta-GGA, hybrid approaches), but there is no uniformanswer on which functional to use for which chemical systems.At the same time, these more involved approaches negate someof the more attractive characteristics of regular DFT. Mostfunctionals tend to give reasonable results around equilibriumgeometries but behave unpredictably in the regime of strongcorrelations or in the presence of dispersive electroninteractions, e.g., bond breaking or solvation chemistry.
Another way to avoid an exponential parameter scaling is by
reducing the electron Hamiltonian to its self-consistent ﬁeld
(SCF) part. This approximates the system as being comprised
of electrons experiencing a mean ﬁeld potential, which has to
be determined self-consistently. As a ﬁrst step, an initial guess
is made for the single-electron orbitals, most frequently theatomic orbitals. After this, the in ﬂuence of all electrons is
averaged into the mean- ﬁeld potential, and new orbitals are
generated from it until convergence is reached. The ground-Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510860


--- PAGE 6 ---
state wave function is described using a single Slater
determinant or con ﬁguration. Correlation e ﬀects are thereby
completely neglected, meaning computational approximationsfor various physical quantities are usually of low quality.Nevertheless, the SCF wave function is often used as a startingpoint to construct a more sophisticated wave function ansatz.
The exact solution to eq 1 for an electronic system described
with a ﬁxed set of basis set functions consists of a variationally
determined superposition of all determinants in the N-particle
Fock space, also known as a full con ﬁguration interaction
(FCI) expansion. Such a wave function cannot be e ﬃciently
manipulated and stored on a classical computer. Correspond-ingly, quantum chemistry methods based on a wave functionapproach comprise a hierarchy of models ranging from thesingle-determinant SCF description to FCI. Each modelassumes a speci ﬁc type of wave function parametrization in
addition to other approximations, o ﬀering di ﬀerent compro-
mises between accuracy and computational cost. Some of themost promising wave functions methods employed in quantumchemistry are described in the next section.
2.2. Classical Methods: Approximation Techniques and
Their Limitations
Quantum computation proposes methods which may over-
come the challenges of quantum chemistry described in theprevious subsection. These algorithms are reviewed in section
3.2However, we emphasize that there are various methods and
techniques in quantum chemistry applied using classicalcomputers that address said challenges. In this section, wereview some representative techniques and motivate thedevelopment of quantum algorithms.
2.2.1. Static Properties: Wave Functions and Energy
Spectra. Coupled Cluster Theory. Coupled cluster
92is
formulated as a compact wave function parametrization interms of an exponential functional of a cluster operator. Thealgorithm leverages several approximations to be tractable on aclassical computer. Most codes utilize the similarity trans-formation formulation with the cluster operator as a pureexcitation operator, taking advantage of the termination of theBaker−Campbell −Haussdorf series. This makes the problem
non-Hermitian and requires a projection onto a small subspaceto solve the cluster amplitudes, introducing a furtherapproximation. Although this formulation of coupled clusteris still exact in the limit of an N-body excitation operator, in
practice, excitation operators are truncated. Such approxima-tions are not guaranteed to behave well. The breakdown ofcoupled cluster with only single and double excitations formolecules in dissociation
93is well-documented. This behavior
can be generalized to any level of truncation of the excitationoperator when strong correlation is exhibited by theHamiltonian.
94There are several approaches95,96that improve
upon this framework by approximating higher order clusteroperators or including static correlation e ﬀects, but develop-
ment of a generally applicable method is still an active ﬁeld of
research.
While coupled cluster theory is a promising method for
quantum chemistry, its non-Hermitian formulation makes theobtained energy non-variational. Variationally optimizedcoupled cluster
97overcomes this problem but can only be
applied to small systems98−100or models with a reduced
parameter space101on a classical computer. The introduction
of a complex conjugate excitation operator implies contrac-tions between the operators in the bra and the ket. Thetransformed Hamiltonian is a full N-body operator with the
number of terms scaling factorially as N!. The problem
becomes more challenging when the operators in the
exponential are not pure excitation operators. In this casethe expectation values that need to be calculated featurecontraction among the cluster operators and there are an
inﬁnite number of terms. Unitary coupled cluster
102(in which
the excitation and de-excitation operators are combined into aunitary cluster operator) and generalized coupled cluster103(in
which the cluster operator lacks a speci ﬁc substructure) fall in
this category. We note that, on a quantum computer, physicaloperations on qubits are often realized in terms of unitaryoperators. If the cluster operator can be represented as a low-
depth quantum circuit, it is e ﬃcient to prepare a unitary
coupled cluster wave function. This method of statepreparation together with a classical optimizer (see section
5.1) enables unitary coupled cluster for general Hamiltonians.
Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC). The idea of e ﬃciently
sampling a distribution of states has a counterpart on classicalcomputers in QMC. It has been very successful in performing
large-scale calculations for extended systems in quantum
chemistry. QMC relies on the stochastic estimation of theenergy of a trial wave function:
∫
∫=⃗Ψ⃗⃗Ψ*⃗
⃗Ψ⃗Ψ*⃗Err H r r
rr rd( ) ( ) ( )
d( ) ( )N
N T3
TT
3
TT (8)
In the real-space variational Monte Carlo formulation, the
position vectors are randomly generated according to theMetropolis algorithm from the norm of the trial wave function.
After su ﬃcient convergence in the energy with respect to the
number of Monte Carlo samples, the wave function parameterscan be updated. This process is repeated until a desired
accuracy has been met.
More accurate QMC methods have been developed, in
which more elaborate distributions are sampled. Di ﬀusion
Monte Carlo (DMC) uses a po pulation of walkers to
stochastically sample the position space. The composition of
the population is algorithmically controlled from generation togeneration. This process depends on the knowledge of thenodes of the exact wave function. A popular implementation of
DMC ﬁxes the nodes of the trial wave function ( ﬁxed-node
DMC), which biases the population but is shown to be morerobust and provides accurate results. Another possibility is to
sample the manifold of electronic con ﬁgurations. The auxiliary
ﬁeld QMC (AFQMC) is performed as an imaginary-time
evolution of the transformed Hamiltonian in terms of the
auxiliary ﬁelds. A sign problem occurs in both DMC and
AFQMC but is mitigated by de ﬁning phase constraints on the
auxiliary ﬁelds from a trial wave function.
There is a natural connection between the underlying
principles of Monte Carlo algorithms and the representation of
a state on a quantum computer. Measurement outcomes fromthe output of a quantum circuit are probabilistic, and severalalgorithms have been proposed for Monte Carlo integration on
a quantum computer that outperform their classical counter-
parts.
104There are certain drawbacks to the approximations in
classical QMC. The most notorious one is the sign problem
that plagues most fermionic implementations. The nature of
fermions makes accurately estimating quantities using the wavefunction a di ﬃcult task. It has been shown that quantum
computers avoid the dynamical sign problem,55providing aChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510861


--- PAGE 7 ---
more e ﬀective alternative to classical methods for quantum
simulation.
Exact Diagonalization (ED). The ED methods92,105,106
provide the exact answer for the wave function and energy
within a certain basis set (i.e., the FCI answer). While QMCarrives at this answer through extrapolation, ED achieves it in asingle calculation by exact diagonalization of the Hamiltonianmatrix without stochastic error bars. This comes at the cost ofstoring the coe ﬃcients of all (relevant) determinants, which
becomes prohibitive even for medium-sized molecules.
107,108
The rapid increase in computing power and the development
of libraries that take advantage of distributed computingclusters have meant a steady increase in the feasible number ofdeterminants.
109−111Despite all these advances, FCI is still the
most useful as a benchmarking method for less-costly quantum
chemical methods. Exact simulation of quantum chemistry
systems is widely regarded as one of the problems that wouldbeneﬁt enormously from quantum hardware.47The
QPEA40,112is the natural translation of the FCI procedure
to quantum computers.41
Tensor Network Methods. Compared to the classical
methods discussed so far, entanglement-based tensor productmethods,113which have been applied to study strongly
correlated many-body physics and quantum chemistry, arecloser to the formulation of gate-model quantum computation.In the case of strongly correlated (multi-reference) systemswhere the concept of a single dominating con ﬁguration breaks
down, traditional single-reference electronic structure methodsare usually not applicable. In contrast, tensor productmethods
113have proved to be e ﬃcient and accurate as
multi-reference computational methods. The most commonlyused entanglement-based tensor product method so far is thequantum chemistry implementation of the density matrixrenormalization group (DMRG) method.
113−122Speciﬁcally,
DMRG variationally optimizes a wave function in the form of amatrix product state (MPS),123
∑ αα α |Ψ⟩ = | ⟩
ααα α
{}AA A ... ...n MPS 1 2n 12
(9)
which is a one-dimensional chain of tensors. In the quantum
chemistry setting, αirepresents the local Hilbert space of a
single ( ith) molecular orbital (MO), i.e., αi∈{|0⟩,|↓⟩,|↑⟩,
|↓↑⟩}. The DMRG computational complexity is governed by
the size of the MPS matrices ( Aαi), formally characterizing the
entanglement between di ﬀerent MOs. MPSs allow for a
compact representation of one-dimensional systems and alsosatisfy an area law124in one dimension. This has led to the
application of DMRG to describe ground states of one-dimensional gapped local Hamiltonians. However, the long-range Coulomb interaction in molecules causes the entangle-ment among the MOs to be multi-dimensional as opposed toone-dimensional. As a result, larger dimension MPS matrices(or “high bond dimension ”MPS) have to be employed in the
case of generic (non-one-dimensional) molecules in order toproperly capture correlations among MOs. These problemscan be alleviated to some extent by optimizing the orbital
ordering along a one-dimensional lattice
125,126as well as by
basis optimization.127However, these problems pose a
practical limit on the applicability of tensor network states(TNSs) for quantum chemistry.
DMRG applied to quantum chemistry can generally handle
large active spaces ( ∼50 MOs128); it handles much larger
active spaces than conventional active-space methods such ascomplete active space self-consistent ﬁeld (CASSCF).129In
certain cases it can reach the exact FCI limit.128,130In the case
of linear (or quasi-linear) molecular systems, active spaces ofhundreds of MOs are reachable.131However, DMRG wave
functions at a low bond dimension miss a sizable amount ofthe dynamic correlation that is important in quantumchemistry. In order to account for the missing dynamiccorrelation not included in the active space, several post-DMRG methods have been developed.
132−140
TNSs141represent a generalization of MPS aimed at an
improved representation of multi-dimensional entanglement.TNSs include, e.g., the projected entangled pair states,142tree
tensor network states (TTNSs),143−147multiscale entangle-
ment renormalization ansatz,148and complete-graph
TNS.149,150A new TTNS variant was recently presented, the
three-legged TTNS, which combines the tree-like network
topology and branching tensors without physical indices.147It
is especially appealing due to its low computational cost andnetwork topology capable of taking into consideration theunderlying entanglement of generic molecules more e ﬃciently.
The FCI wave function expansion coe ﬃcients can be
converted into the MPS form by successive applications ofthe singular value decomposition.
123,151In the case of the
TTNS ansatz, which is the most general TNS without anyloops, higher-order singular value decomposition is employed.Factorization of the FCI wave function into the MPS formitself does not bring any computational savings, as it results inbond dimensions of the size of the original problem. In orderto achieve polynomial scaling, bounded bond dimensions haveto be applied. Consequently, the entanglement between twosubsystems of the bipartite splitting governs the quantuminformation loss
152and accuracy of the ansatz. It must be
noted that low bond dimension MPSs are not candidates forquantum speed-up, as slightly entangled quantum computa-tions may be efficiently simulated on a classical computer using
the MPS formalism.
151
2.2.2. Dynamical Properties: Time Evolution of the
Wave Function. Zero-temperature ground-state quantum
chemistry covers only a restricted set of the chemistry innature. Many processes occur at ﬁnite temperature where the
system is propagated in time and described by the time-dependent Schro ̈dinger equation:
∂
∂Ψ⃗=Ψ⃗ itrt H rt(,) (,)(10)
When the Hamiltonian is time-independent, this equation is
formally solved by
Ψ⃗=−Ψ ⃗ rt i H t r(,) e x p ( ) (, 0 ) (11)
The expansion of this equation in terms of eigenvectors ψj(r ⃗)
of the time-independent Hamiltonian,
∑ ψ Ψ⃗=− ⃗ rt c i E t r(,) e x p ( )()
jjj j
(12)
reveals the di ﬃculty of the problem: exact time evolution
requires knowledge of the full spectrum of the Hamiltonian
and the expansion of the initial state in terms of the
eigenvectors. This is only feasible for very small systems.
Several levels of approximations are often applied to
approach the problem. Here we review two broad categoriesof methods. Molecular dynamics avoids the explicit wavefunction propagation by treating the nuclei as classical chargedChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510862


--- PAGE 8 ---
particles and only solving for the electrostatic ﬁeld from
electron density with ﬁxed nuclei positions. Other methods
avoid maintaining the full wave function with strategies similarto those described in section 2.2.1 , with an additional
consideration of time dependence.
Molecular Dynamics (MD). When studying the dynamics of
large chemical systems (approximately hundreds of atoms),one often is interested in properties for which no quantumeﬀects are necessary. It is su ﬃcient to use classical MD
methods which simulate the problem using an e ﬀective force
ﬁeld and Newtonian mechanics.
153MD is often applied to
problems such as di ﬀusion rates, reaction rates, conformal
changes, infrared spectra, and binding energies, to study
processes such as protein folding, gas absorption in porousmaterials, stress-induced material deformation, and electrolytesolvation, among many others. Because these quantities canoften be calculated to desired accuracy by treating each atomas a classical Newtonian particle, MD avoids the constructionof a Hilbert space under time evolution.
In order to advance one time step in a Newtonian
simulation, the forces on the particles need to beapproximated. This is achieved in MD by introducing a forceﬁeld that acts on the atoms without explicitly considering
electronic degrees of freedom. A force ﬁeld comprises of a set
of terms that are parametrized by electronic structurecalculations or experiment. The dynamics of the system arepropagated using algorithms such as Euler or Verletintegration, after which one can obtain an intuitive qualitativeunderstanding of the dynamics of a process (e.g., protein −
ligand docking) or calculate quantitative results from
correlation functions (such as spectra or di ﬀusion constants).
If the primary interest is in ﬁnding low-energy states (which is
the case in ﬁnding the lowest-energy molecular crystal
conformation or in protein −ligand docking), then the
dynamics are less relevant, and one of many optimizationmethods is used to ﬁnd the ground state of the system. We
note that one way to improve accuracy is to use ab initio
electronic structure methods in conjunction with MD methodsas a way to consider dynamics for the whole system. Such
methods include Born −Oppenheimer MD
154and Carr −
Parinello MD.155
There are many chemical systems for which nuclear
quantum e ﬀects must be considered, even if the electronic
degrees of freedom can be safely absorbed into the force ﬁeld.
Such e ﬀects include nuclear tunneling and zero-point vibra-
tional energy, which are not captured by Newtonian
mechanics. Nuclear quantum e ﬀects are needed for simulating
condensed matter systems containing low-temperature heliumand hydrogen,156as well as for obtaining high-accuracy
simulations of hydrogen-containing room-temperature systemssuch as liquid water.157A variety of ﬂavors of path integral
methods158have been developed to model nuclear quantum
eﬀects, including path-integral MD,159centroid MD,160and
ring-polymer MD.161Conceptually, these methods operate by
discretizing an atom into many “beads ”that represent a state of
the system in the path integral. While these methods include
some quantum e ﬀects listed above, they avoid using a Hilbert
space, which limits their computational cost to that of classicalMD methods.
It is important to note that, even though MD has opened a
whole ﬁeld of research that was previously inaccessible, the
method has limitations that are hard to overcome without
fundamentally altering the procedure. The most severeproblem is the limited amount of time propagation that MD
currently supports. Some processes in biochemistry, such asconformational transitions in hemoglobin, occur on a timescale that is many times the current limit of MDcalculations.
162
Quantum Time Evolution. Most of the methods in section
2.2.1 can be adapted to perform time evolution over which the
quantum character is preserved at all steps. One of thestrategies for time propagation is directly propagating thesolution of the Schro ̈dinger equation, i.e., updating an explicit
wave function or density matrix at each time step. This quicklybecomes memory intensive and requires a method to
approximate the matrix exponential of the Hamiltonian.
163
Moler and Van Loan164categorized the many methods for
approximating the operation of a matrix exponential. TheTaylor expansion, Pade ́approximant, and Chebyshev approx-
imant are series methods based on powers of theHamiltonian
163,164to approximate the evolution operator.
They are accurate for small matrices but prohibitively
expensive for larger systems. Standard ordinary di ﬀerential
equation solvers such as Runge −Kutta are a common
workhorse for time propagation of classical equations. Theycan be adapted to perform quantum propagation,163,165
although they are not the most computationally e ﬃcient
choice for a given accuracy. Polynomial methods form anotheralgorithmic category. They rely on the exact expression ofhigh-order matrix powers as lower-order polynomials of theHamiltonian.
166The bottleneck for those methods is
calculating the characteristic polynomial, which is expensive
for large matrices. Note that in practice these methods are
often combined for instance, after performing the Lanczos
decomposition, one may use the Pade ́approximant on the
resulting smaller approximate matrix.167For all of these
methods, the propagation or matrix exponentiation algorithmis chosen based on desired accuracy, the size of the system,ease of implementation, and properties of the matrix such as itscondition number.
Matrix decomposition methods try to approximate the
operator exponential of the Hamiltonian directly. Theprototypical example of this is the decomposition of theexponential as e
A=SeVS−1, where A=SVS−1and Vis
diagonal. This approach requires far fewer matrix −matrix
operations than the naive implementation. Improved stabilityand e ﬃciency are often observed by rewriting the exponential
in terms of triangular (e.g., Schur) or block-diagonal matrix
decompositions.168There are also splitting methods which
apply an approximation that can be used if the Hamiltonian isexpressible as a sum of matrices, and where each term of thesum can be simulated by a known e ﬃcient method. This is the
same procedure used in the Trotter −Suzuki method as well as
the split-operator method for applying the kinetic and potentialenergy terms separately.
169Finally, the Krylov subspace
methods (e.g., the Lanczos method for Hermitian matrices)make it possible to approximate e
−iHvfor a given vector vby
solely performing matrix −vector multiplications.167,170This is
eﬃcient for large matrices.
One of the most cost-e ﬀective ways to obtain time-
dependent properties without explicitly doing time propaga-tion is the ﬁrst-order perturbation approach, or linear response
theory. Even though the original formulation of time-dependent density functional theory (TD-DFT)
171does not
require the time-dependent part of the Hamiltonian to be
small, it has mostly been applied using this assumption.172−174Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510863


--- PAGE 9 ---
In the same spirit, a linear response approximation to
DMRG175,176and coupled cluster177−179allows for the
calculation of dynamical properties with high-level quantumchemistry methods. Linear response is the ﬁrst-order expansion
of a time-dependent property, and perturbation theory fallsshort of describing the full time dependence. Ideally we wouldlike to be able to truly propagate quantum wave functions foran arbitrary amount of time.
The time-dependent variational principle (TDVP)
180−182
has enabled time-dependent variational Monte Carlo calcu-
lations for bosons183and strongly correlated fermions.184
Although the TDVP has also found its application inDMRG,185the most popular algorithm for time evolution
with a DMRG-style ansatz is called time-evolving blockdecimation.186This method relies on a Trotterization of the
time evolution and DMRG truncation of the Hilbert space
after every time step. A more thorough review of timeevolution algorithms related to DMRG can be found in thereport by Schollwo ̈ck.
187Despite these impressive e ﬀorts to
formulate analogous time-dependent methods, the short-comings of the tensor-based methods they are based on areequally present and even aggravated. After longer timeevolution, errors due to the inherent approximationsaccumulate and lead to loss of accuracy and a rapidly growingbond dimension.
Simulating dynamical behavior around conical intersections
is an important topic in theoretical chemistry, relevant forstudying reaction mechanisms, and in photochemistry,including photocatalysis and the interpretation of spectro-scopic results. Conical intersections occur when two electronicstates, e.g., the ground state and ﬁrst excited state of a
molecule, intersect at a point in nuclear coordinate space.Close to these points, the BOA breaks down, resulting inentanglement between electronic and nuclear degrees offreedom. This means that the full quantum state is no longerwell-approximated with a product state, necessitating methodsthat allow for multi-reference character in the wave function, ofwhich we mention three popular methods here. The multi-conﬁguration time-dependent Hartree (MCTDH) algo-
rithm
188models all relevant quantum degrees of freedom,
propagating superpositions of product states. Evolution of a
wave packet over longer time periods in MCTDH requires
considerable computer resources, and therefore larger systemsare out of the scope of current capabilities. The matching-pursuit/split-operator Fourier transform
189and the more
classical multiple spawning method190use careful metrics to
continually update the basis set in which the system ispropagated to ensure e ﬃcient simulation. Recent reviews have
been published on these and other algorithms for studyingnon-adiabatic dynamics and conical intersections.
191,192
2.3. Quantum Methods: Going beyond Classical
Limitations Using Quantum Computers
All of the classical techniques introduced in the previous
section are designed to avoid two features in a computation:explicitly maintaining the full many-body wave function |ψ⟩
and propagating the wave function in time by general matrix −
vector multiplication e
−iHt|ψ⟩. However, as we will discuss in
this section, quantum computers allow for e ﬃcient imple-
mentation of these two features. For the former, i.e., staterepresentation, there are quantum states for which no knowneﬃcient classical representation exists, but that can be prepared
on a quantum computer. The quantum computer thus hasaccess to a richer state space for the ground-state search for
certain systems. For the latter feature, time evolution, a longline of inquiry in quantum computing that spans more than
two decades has led to a re ﬁned set of quantum algorithms for
eﬃciently simulating time evolution under both time-
independent and time-dependent Hamiltonians. These twofeatures of a quantum computer allow for algorithm design
techniques that are quite di ﬀerent from the classical algorithms
for simulating quantum systems. Both state preparation andHamiltonian evolution are instrumental to the techniques wereview in this section.
In addition to distinguishing between static and dynamic
problems as in the previous section, we also make a distinction
between NISQ devices and fault-tolerant quantum computing
(FTQC) devices. The ﬁrst are available at present or are using
technologies that will be available in the near-term, while thelatter require much more research and are a much longer-term
prospect. The main di ﬀerence between NISQ and FTQC
devices concerns decoherence due to the environmental noiseand whether it sets an upper limit on the time duration of aquantum computation. In this sense, NISQ devices are
sensitive to sources of noise and error (hence the term
“noisy ”in NISQ), while FTQC devices can, in principle, carry
out coherent quantum computation for an arbitrary amount oftime.
Many well-known quantum algorithms that have become
standard examples of quantum speed-ups over classical
algorithms, such as Shor ’s quantum factorization algorithm,
35
the quantum search algorithm by Grover,38and QPEA (which
we review here), in fact assume the availability of FTQCdevices in order to deliver the promised quantum advantage.
This does not a priori exclude the possibility of quantum
advantage on NISQ devices. In fact, there are promising ideaswhich may bring tangible results for quantum chemistry onnear-term devices.
Before discussing any quantum simulation algorithms, we
would like to start with how wave functions of quantumsystems can be represented on a quantum computer. The basic
building blocks of quantum computation are controllable two-
level systems called qubits . If we denote the two levels of a
qubit as |0⟩and|1⟩, the wave function of an n-qubit quantum
computer can be expressed as a superposition of 2
n
computational basis states :
∑ ψ|⟩= |⟩⊗|⟩⊗ ⊗| ⟩
∈{ }ai i i ...
ii iii i n
, ,..., 0,1... 1 2
nn
1212
(13)
For describing a computational basis state, the Kronecker
product symbol ⊗is commonly dropped for simplicity in
notation. For example, we will use |110⟩for representing the
three-qubit state |1⟩⊗|1⟩⊗|0⟩. Early proposals52,53for
representing wave functions of quantum systems consider a
real-space representation where the spatial wave function ψ(x)
is discretized into grid points ∑iψi|i⟩, with each |i⟩being a
computational basis state. Similar representations have been
improved in later studies applying them to simulation of
quantum dynamics in real space.88,89An alternative repre-
sentation considers the second-quantized picture where eachcomputational basis state |i
1i2...in⟩corresponds to a Slater
determinant in the Fock space. Each ij= 1 if the spin-orbital jis
occupied and 0 otherwise. This representation underlies themajority of quantum algorithms for quantum chemistry onboth NISQ and FTQC devices. One of the appealing featuresChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510864


--- PAGE 10 ---
of this approach is that it allows one to transform the
molecular Hamiltonian into a standard second-quantized form,
∑∑=+†† †H ha a h a a a a1
4q
pqpq p q
pqrspqrs p q r s 2
,, , , (14)
where ai†andaiare raising and lowering operators acting on
theith basis function. Here the coe ﬃcients hpqand hpqrsare
one-electron and two-electron integrals which can be e ﬃciently
computed classically for many choices of basis functions. Thefermionic operators obey anti-commutation relations { a
i,aj†}=
aiaj†+aj†ai=δijand { ai,aj}={ ai†,aj†} = 0. One can transform
the Hamiltonian expressed in terms of operators into a morenatural form for quantum simulation of electronic structure ona quantum computer. The basic idea is to replace eachfermionic operator with a tensor product of Pauli matrices, X=
()0110,Y=−()ii00, and Z=−( )1001. While there are several
methods for accomplishing this transform,193,194all result in a
Hamiltonian that is a linear combination of tensor products of
matrices { I,X,Y,Z}, with I=()1001, in such a way that
preserves the fermionic anti-commutation relations. In general
we can write such a Hamiltonian as a k-local Hamiltonian :
∑ σσ σ=‐H c ...k
iii i i k local ,1 ,2 ,
(15)
Here “k-local ”means that each term in the Hamiltonian acts
non-trivially on at most kqubits. In eq 15 , the notation σi,j
means the jth operator in the ith term of the Hamiltonian.
Each σi,jis a Pauli operator acting on one qubit. For a detailed
illustration of mapping from a molecular Hamiltonian to a k-
local Hamiltonian representation in the Fock space, the readeris encouraged to refer to Appendix C for an example using a
hydrogen molecule.
The organization of this section is similar to that of the
previous section where the problem space is partitioned intostatic and dynamic problems. In addition, for each category wediscuss quantum techniques devised for both NISQ andFTQC devices. The goal is to introduce some representativeideas in the space, leaving more detailed discussions to sections
4and5andAppendix C .
2.3.1. Static Properties: Phase Estimation and Varia-
tional Quantum Eigensolvers. The idea of quantum phase
estimation (QPE) can be traced back to early works onquantum mechanics by von Neuman
195inquiring the nature of
quantum measurements. Contemporary discussions on phaseestimation would commonly place its origin at the work ofKitaev et al.
54However, textbooks1on quantum computing
typically use another version of phase estimation which di ﬀers
from Kitaev ’s version. The basic idea stems from the fact that,
for a given unitary operator U, its eigenvalues take the form of
ap h a s e λj=eiφj. We assume that Uhas an e ﬃcient
implementation on a quantum computer. That is, if Uacts
onnqubits, there is a polynomial-length sequence of
elementary operations that one can perform on a quantumcomputer which equals or well approximates U. For an
eigenstate |ψ
j⟩, the phase estimation1algorithm transforms the
state on a quantum computer into
ψψ φ|⟩| ⟩→| ⟩|̃⟩ 0jj j (16)
where |φ̃j⟩is a state that encodes an approximation of the
phase φj/2π. The approximation error comes from the attemptto capture the value of φj, which is a continuous variable, with
aﬁnite qubit register and hence a ﬁnite-dimensional quantum
system. By measuring the state |φ̃j⟩, one could extract the
phase φiup to the precision allowed by the qubit register.
Phase estimation is an algorithmic framework that
encapsulates a broad set of quantum algorithms. For example,Shor ’s algorithm for integer factorization
35and amplitude
estimation196both can be cast as a form of phase estimation
for speci ﬁc construction of unitary operators U. Most relevant
to this Review is the use of phase estimation for extracting the
eigenspectrum of a Hamiltonian H. This corresponds to the
special case where U=e−iHt.Eﬃcient implementation of e−iHt
is the subject of Hamiltonian simulation , which merits a
separate discussion in section 2.3.2 . It should be noted that, in
the case where the objective is a speci ﬁc eigenstate of the
Hamiltonian such as the ground state |ψ0⟩, an appropriate
initial state |ϕ0⟩, reasonably close to |ψ0⟩, is needed. To see
this, consider a general state |ϕ⟩=∑jβj|ψj⟩. Applying phase
estimation on the initial state |ϕ⟩|0⟩yields∑jβj|ψj⟩|φ̃j⟩. Upon
measurement of the second qubit register, one would like tomaximize the chance of obtaining |φ̃
0⟩, which is dictated by
|β0|2. In order to obtain the ground-state energy in a time
duration that scales polynomially in the number of qubits n
acted on by the Hamiltonian H, we require that |β0|2be at least
as large as an inverse polynomial in n. Several methods of state
preparation on a quantum computer have been discussed in
the literature, and we review them in detail in section 4.2.1 .
For quantum chemistry applications, there are well-
motivated methods for preparing initial wave functions basedon eﬃciently computable ansatzes. In addition, the Hamil-
tonians for molecular electronic structure problems are alsowell studied in the context of implementing time evolution U=
e
−iHt. Both ingredients give hope that quantum computers can
take advantage of QPE to e ﬃciently compute the spectra of
quantum systems to accuracy comparable to that of FCI.However, an important technical point is that the sequences ofoperations (or quantum circuits, see section 4.1.3 ) yielded
from phase estimation are often too deep to be feasible on
today ’s NISQ devices.
60,197,198Instead they require fault-
tolerant quantum computers which can, in principle, performquantum computation inde ﬁn i t e l y .H o w e v e r ,t h e r ea r e
signiﬁcant technical challenges which need to be met before
fault-tolerance can be achieved. For NISQ devices, the recentlyproposed paradigm of the hybrid quantum −classical (HQC)
algorithm is a more practical framework for developing
heuristics to solve the same problems of eigenstates andenergy levels.
A salient feature of HQC algorithms is that much of the
computational burden is o ﬀ-loaded to a classical computer.
The quantum computer is only used for its ability to prepare
entangled states that are otherwise hard to represent classically
and to make measurements with respect to the states.Speciﬁcally, the setting is that the quantum computer can
prepare a set of states |ψ(θ⃗)⟩parametrized by classical
parameters θ⃗. One then makes measurement with respect to
the state, and the classical computer updates the parameter
setting to θ⃗′and feeds it back into the state preparation on the
quantum device. By iterating between classical and quantumprocessors, the hybrid algorithm eventually trains the quantumcomputer to prepare the state that is desired for the problem.An important class of HQC algorithms that are useful for
solving static problems in quantum chemistry is the variationalChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510865


--- PAGE 11 ---
quantum eigensolver (VQE), which will be discussed in greater
detail in section 5.1
2.3.2. Dynamical Properties: Hamiltonian Simulation
and Hybrid Methods. Many quantum chemistry problems
concern the time evolution of a quantum state under aHamiltonian H. Propagating an initial wave function |ψ
0⟩in
time by calculating |ψ(t)⟩=e−iHt|ψ0⟩is, in general, hard on a
classical computer. As we have alluded to in section 2.2 ,
classically tractable cases include restricted settings where
1. the system is small enough for the Hamiltonian to be
treatable with explicit methods;
2. the time step tis small, for which e−iHt≈I−iHtthis
yields a linear response theory;
3. eﬃcient approximation of the wave function is possible
using, for instance, tensor networks, as in t-DMRG, ormore recently neural networks;199
4. the dynamical sign problem can be e ﬀectively
suppressed.200
Quantum computation circumvents the main issues
encountered in classical methods by maintaining a highlyentangled quantum state which may not admit an e ﬃcient
classical description, enabling a fundamentally di ﬀerent
approach to realizing the unitary evolution and, in doing so,
avoiding the dynamical sign problem.55
On a (fault-tolerant) quantum computer, there are e ﬃcient
methods for implementing an approximation of e−iHtfor
arbitrary tand a broad class of Hamiltonians H. Early works on
Hamiltonian simulation41,50,201assumed that Hcan be written
as a sum of local terms, H=∑jHj, where each Hjacts on a
subsystem. By application of the Trotter −Suzuki formula, the
problem becomes how to implement each e−iHjtindividually on
a quantum computer. For molecular electronic structureproblems the recipes for such implementations have beenexplicitly speci ﬁed.
201Using such recipes, implementing e−iHt
for an n-qubit Hamiltonian takes time polynomial in non a
quantum computer, while a classical computer takes time atleast∼2
n. In recent years there has been an extensive line of
inquiry56−59in estimating and improving Hamiltonian
simulation techniques in the context of phase estimation forquantum chemistry applications.
An alternative setting of Hamiltonian simulation202,203
considers an “oracle model ”where the Hamiltonian is assumed
to be a sparse matrix and its elements are provided by a black-box (or oracle ), such that when queried with the row number i
and the index j(namely ﬁrst, second, etc.) the black-box
returns the jth non-zero element of the matrix. It is also
a s s u m e dt h a to n ec a nm a k eq u e r i e st ot h eo r a c l ei nsuperposition and obtain answers in superposition. The totalcost of the algorithm is then taken to be either the number oftotal queries or the sum of total queries and the total numberof elementary operations performed on a quantum computer.Some of the recently developed paradigms for Hamiltoniansimulation
202−205achieve exponential improvements in pre-
cision compared with their predecessors.202,203They have also
been applied to quantum chemistry,206,207yielding a similar
exponential improvement. We will expand on the details in
section 4.1 .
Naturally, any discussion of realizing the operation e−iHtis
restricted to simulating time evolution of closed ,time-
independent systems. More generally, algorithms for simulating
open quantum systems have also been explored.208−210These
algorithms focus on the Hamiltonian and Lindblad operatorsbeing sparse and given by oracles (black-boxes). For time-
dependent Hamiltonians, early works211focus on variants of
Trotter−Suzuki formula, which are subsequently improved
with black-box models.203Recently, simulation techniques in
the interaction picture212have been proposed. A similar
technique has also been applied in quantum chemistry213to
produce the ﬁrst quantum simulation algorithm of cost scaling
sublinearly in the number of basis functions. In parallel with
previous methods for simulating time-independent Hamilto-nians203yielding near-optimal cost scaling, techniques for
simulating time-dependent Hamiltonians using Dyson series214 have also been recently proposed, with scaling matchingthe time-independent case.
203
All of the quantum algorithms mentioned in this subsection
rely on the possibility of fault-tolerant quantum computers in
order to outperform any of their classical counterparts.
However, the prospect of physical fault-tolerant devices willmost likely require decades of experimental progress. Thisprospect has led researchers to investigate what quantumdynamics one can simulate with the quantum devices that wehave today. Indeed, there are already proposals
66for NISQ
algorithms based on variational principles.215,216In these
methods, a quantum state |ψ(θ⃗)⟩is generated by a low depth
circuit with classical parameters θ⃗. The time evolution of an
initial state |ψ(θ⃗0)⟩then translates to updating the classical
parameters iteratively as the simulation progresses. Moredetails on using variational principles for both real andimaginary time propagation will be discussed in section 5.2 .
3. COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY
There are many examples of elusive problems in quantum
physics or quantum chemistry that seem to defy e ﬃcient
solutions despite decades of e ﬀort. These include the 3D Ising
problem, Hubbard models, and ﬁnding the universal functional
in DFT. In the face of these hard open problems, one may askthe question of why these problems remain unanswered. Is it alack of human ingenuity and understanding, or a fundamentaldiﬃculty that is inherent to these problems? Being able to
answer this question not only provides theoretical insights onthe problems themselves but could also provide guidance forresearch e ﬀorts to choose the most fruitful direction toward a
solution. To make progress, one may turn to the theory ofcomputational complexity , which seeks to rigorously character-
ize the computational hardness of various problems.
81In order
to help capture the inherent hardness of solving variousfamilies of problems, the th eoretical computer science
community has developed the concept of complexity classes .
It is important to note that the computational complexity of
a given problem refers to its worst-case hardness, and does notalways inform us of how di ﬃcult a problem is to solve in
practice. A pertinent example is that of determining theoptimal Hartree −Fock (HF) approximation of a molecular
eigenstate. This problem is known to have the same complexity(NP-completeness) as many infamously hard problems. Yet,
there are heuristic methods which regularly solve the HFproblem in practice. Complexity classes account for the worst-
case instances of a problem, even if these instances may rarely
occur in practice. The utility of de ﬁning complexity classes,
then, is that they provide a reality check when developing newmethods for solving previously classi ﬁed problems.
The remainder of the section is organized as follows (see
alsoFigure 1 ). We start with section 3.1 , where we establish
the basic notions in the theory of computational complexity.Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510866


--- PAGE 12 ---
Building on these de ﬁnitions, sections 3.2 and 3.3discuss
results related to problems of electronic structure andmolecular vibronic structure, respectively.
3.1. Complexity Classes
This section intends to provide an intuitive introduction intothe notion of complexity classes. Consider the example ofﬁnding the ground states of a family of Hamiltonians of various
system sizes. Formally, this is an example of a problem , while
ﬁnding the ground state of a particular Hamiltonian within this
family is an example of a problem instance . Problems and
problem instances are two important primitives in the study ofcomputational complexity classes.
From the computational viewpoint, an algorithm is efficient
for a problem if for any problem instance of size nit can solve
the instance in a time that is less than some polynomial
function of n. Here the “size ”is a parameter of the problem
that characterizes how much information is needed to specifythe problem completely (e.g., basis set size in the ground-statesearch of a molecular Hamiltonian, number of grid points in a
real-space calculation). This allows us to rigorously character-
ize how hard it is to solve a computational problem.
The simplest category of complexity classes involves decision
problems , which are problems for which the answer is binary
(“yes ”or “no”). If a decision problem has an e ﬃcient
algorithm, then it is in complexity class P,m e a n i n g
deterministic polynomial time . If a decision problem is such
that, when provided a candidate solution, one can e ﬃciently
check whether the candidate is correct, then the problem is inthe complexity class NP, which stands for non-deterministic
polynomial time . It is unknown whether a problem being
eﬃcient to check implies that it is e ﬃcient to solve. This
question is captured by the famous PvsNPconjecture
217that
is still unsolved. Another important complexity class is knownasNP-hard. The quali ﬁcation “hard ”is used to indicate that a
problem is at least as hard as any problem in that class.
Formally, a problem is said to be NP-hard if an algorithm for
solving such problems can be e ﬃciently translated into an
algorithm for solving any problem in NP. If a problem is both
NP-hard and in NP, it is said to be NP-complete. Roughly
speaking, a problem being NP-complete is strong evidence that
there does not exist a provably e ﬃcient algorithm to solve it, be
it of classical or quantum nature.218
In addition to decision problems, another important
category of problem is counting problems . While a decision
problem can be formulated as “Does a solution exist? ”,a
counting problem can be formulated as “How many solutions
exist? ”. From the class of problems in NPderives a complexity
class of counting problems known as #P(“Sharp-P ”). The
complexity class #Pis roughly de ﬁned as the set of problems
which ask to count the number of solutions to probleminstances, where candidate solutions can be e ﬃciently checked.
There is a sense in which problems in #Pare at least as hard as
the corresponding problems in NP. If one had a way to
compute the number of solutions to a problem, then one coulddetermine whether a solution exists.
The complexity classes P,NP, and #Passume that the
underlying computation is classical. In other words, Pis the
class of problems e ﬃciently solvable on a classical computer,
NPis the class of problems whose solutions are e ﬃciently
checkable on a classical computer, and #Pis the class of
problems which count the number of solutions for problemswhose solutions are e ﬃciently checkable on a classicalcomputer. The advent of quantum computing has also led to
research on the quantum generalizations of these complexity
classes. In particular, the complexity class BQP , short for
bounded-error quantum polynomial-time , refers to the set of
problems that can be e ﬃciently solved on a quantum
computer. QMA , short for quantum Merlin-Arthur , refers to
the set of problems such that, when presented a candidate
solution as a quantum state, one can use a quantum computer
to eﬃciently verify the solution. Drawing a parallel from the
discussion above, if a problem is QMA -complete, then it is
unlikely that there is an e ﬃcient solution even on a quantum
computer. While the quantum analog of #P,#BQP , has been
de
ﬁned and has been shown to contain important physical
problems, it turns out to be of equal complexity to #P.80
Although the exact relationships between the complexity
classes remain largely open, certain containment relationships
have already been proven ( Figure 2 ).
At the intersection between theoretical computer science
and condensed matter physics has emerged a research programthat has recently come under the name quantum Hamiltonian
complexity .219,220Quantum Hamiltonian complexity seeks to
gain insights on some of the most challenging open problemsin quantum physics and chemistry. Most notably, it has beenshown that ﬁnding the ground-state energy of many simple,
locally interacting systems is QMA -complete.
221,222The three
examples of open problems we mentioned in the beginning ofthis section all have their own computational complexitycharacterizations: the 3D Ising model is NP-complete,
223
ﬁnding the ground state of Bose −Hubbard model is QMA -
complete,224andﬁnding the universal functional in DFT is
alsoQMA -complete.78Finally, we note that a comprehensive
list225ofQMA -complete problems has been compiled, and the
reader may use it for further exploration.
3.2. Complexity Theory of the Electronic Structure
Problem
The exponential complexity in handling the exact wave
function is well known to be a major obstacle in solvingmany important problems in quantum chemistry, such as
electronic structure calculations. In section 2.1 we elaborated
on classical methods for circumventing the exponentialcomplexity. Here we review rigorous results for characterizingcomputational hardness of various problems in electronicstructure. Naturally, the QMA -completeness results for the
ground state of locally interacting systems mentioned beforelead to speculations about potential consequences for
Figure 2. Known relationship between the complexity classes
discussed in this section. Note that some classes reside entirely
inside other classes, which naturally de ﬁnes a di ﬃculty hierarchy.
Note that P#Pand the polynomial hierarchy PH are powerful
complexity classes that relate to some of the major developments in
quantum complexity theory.Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510867


--- PAGE 13 ---
electronic structure.226Indeed, other than ﬁnding the universal
functional for DFT,78the problem of checking whether a given
set of two-electron reduced density matrices (2RDMs) isconsistent with a single many-electron wave function, knownas the N-representability problem , has also been proven QMA -
complete.
79Solving the HF method, which intends to ﬁnd a
single Slater determinant that best approximates the true wavefunction, has been shown to be NP-complete.78The NP-
completeness has also been proven to persist even if onerestricts to translationally invariant systems.227
Although it is unlikely that one can ﬁnd general and provably
eﬀective (quantum or classical) algorithms for QMA -complete
orNP-complete problems, in practice, there are heuristic
m e t h o d st h a th a v eg a i n e ds o m ee m p i r i c a ls u c c e s s .F o rexample, in the case of HF, the SCF iteration serves as alocal search algorithm which can converge to a local optimum.By chance, this can also be the global optimum, but provingthat it is, or systematically ﬁnding the global minimum, is NP-
complete. Although the N-representability problem is QMA -
complete, heuristic methods building on constrained opti-mization of 2RDMs can nonetheless produce useful results inmany cases.
228,229On quantum computers, the strategies for
navigating the computational hardness of ﬁnding the
eigenstates and eigenenergies revolve around exploiting theability to maintain full wave functions encoded as multi-qubitentangled states. For example, the VQE may start by preparinga physically motivated wave function ansatz that is otherwisehard to prepare classically, such as unitary coupled cluster.
63
Another cause for optimism in light of the QMA -completeness
of the ground-state problem for general local Hamiltonians isthat the Hamiltonians occurring in quantum chemistryproblems are more restricte d than the general setting
considered in the computational complexity results.
81
Aside from the problems that are provably hard in the worst
case, there are problems that canbe eﬃciently solved on a
quantum computer. Many such problems are related to thetime evolution of a wave function under a Hamiltonian. Insection 2.3.2 we mentioned some representative techniques for
realizing unitary time evolution on a quantum computer. Eachpolynomial-time quantum algorithm is by itself a proof that the
corresponding problem addressed by the algorithm is in BQP .
In contrast to the QMA -completeness of evaluating the
universal functional in DFT,
78the problem of evaluating the
time-dependent e ﬀective Kohn −Sham potential can be
eﬃciently addressed on a quantum computer230and is
therefore in BQP .
We categorize the problems and their respective computa-
tional complexity classes in Table 1 .A tﬁrst glance one might
ﬁnd it surprising that the commonly used HF method is
solving an NP-complete problem, which is in the same
complexity class as 3D Ising ground state. Other than recallingthat the complexity class characterizations are for worst-case
instances, we note that the e ﬀectiveness of the HF method
typically relies on initial guesses that are well motivated byphysical and chemical insights. A good initial guess wouldallow the SCF procedure to converge to a local optimum thatis reasonably accurate, especially in near-equilibrium geo-
metries. However, in geometries far from equilibrium wherethe many-body electronic wave function cannot be easilydescribed by a single Slater determinant, the HF methodtypically struggles to ﬁnd a good approximation.
92It is our
belief that these strongly correlated regimes are where theworst-case instances are more likely to arise.
3.3. Complexity Theory in Molecular Vibronics
The motivation for solving chemical problems on a quantumcomputer often stems from the ability of the computer tonatively simulate some or all of the dynamics of the chemical
system directly on a quantum device. An appealingconsequence of such native simulation is that the computingdevice often does not need to use a great deal of resourcesencoding the appropriate quantum states onto the hardware,thereby reducing the resource overhead signi ﬁcantly. While
there are as yet no quantum computer systems whose
underlying physical platform is naturally fermionic, the ﬁeld
of linear optical quantum computing has seen substantialprogress toward performing quantum information processingwith photons, which are bosonic systems. Given the resource-limited nascent state of gate-model quantum computing,algorithms that look toward solving bosonic chemical problemsmay be particularly valuable for showing early demonstrationsof post-classical computing and making an impact onchemistry in the immediate future.
In particular, the optical boson sampling model is one such
proposal for a near-term application. The model consists of aseries of optical modes, or pathways, where light is allowed topropagate. Along these modes are passive linear optics devices,such as beam splitters and phase shifters, which allow theexchange of photons to take place between two modes. Thisgenerates so-called number-mode entanglement in a bosonicFock space, much like the fermionic Fock space correspondingto the occupation number basis, which conserves the totalnumber of photons (note that a major di ﬀerence between
bosonic and fermionic Fock spaces is the ability for bosonicmodes to be occupied by any number of photons, as opposedto spin-orbitals which have at most a single fermion). It isnatural, then, to consider chemical systems which are describedby bosonic processes as candidates for a quantum algorithm onthis platform.
One particular process is molecular vibronic spectroscopy,
which considers the vibrational transitions between twoelectronic states of a molecule. This process is fullycharacterized by the Franck−Condon profile (FCP),
232which
describes the spectra of vibronic modes in the harmonicregime. Recall that vibrational modes can be described byexcitations of phonons, which are virtual bosonic particles.
There are a number of important molecular properties that
depend on the vibrational modes of a molecule, particularlythose related to its interaction with light. Emission, absorption,and Raman scattering all depend on the electronic states of themolecule, which in turn are in ﬂuenced by the vibrational
frequencies. For instance, in a spectroscopic setting, theseproperties could be used to e xtract information aboutTable 1. Representative Problems in Quantum Physics and Quantum Chemistry and Their Computational Complexity Classes
BQP NP -complete QMA -complete
simulating unitary time evolution88ground state of 3D Ising models223N-representability79
approximating Kohn −Sham potential in TD-DFT230Hartree −Fock on general quantum systems78universal functional in DFT78
quantum phase estimation231Hartree −Fock on translationally invariant systems227Bose−Hubbard model224Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510868


--- PAGE 14 ---
unknown molecules. For molecular engineering of solar cells or
photosynthetic materials, it may be necessary to havemolecules meeting particular constraints on these properties.However, it may be prohibitively expensive in time orresources to experimentally test every candidate molecule;simulation of vibronic spectra then becomes a valuable tool. Aquantum algorithm to solve this problem is detailed later insection 5.3.2 ; here, we will motivate the development of such
an algorithm by discussing the complexity and theoreticlimitations of solving the problem with only classical methods.
To describe molecular vibronic processes, it was shown by
Duschinsky
233that a linear relationship between the initial and
ﬁnal normal coordinates ( q ⃗andq ⃗′, respectively) could be given
by
⃗′=⃗+⃗ qU q dDus (17)
where UDusis a real-valued matrix called the Duschinsky matrix
andd ⃗is a displacement vector. Doktorov et al.234showed that
this corresponds to a unitary rotation ÛDokof the bosonic
ladder operators:
′=̂̂†††a Ua UDok Dok (18)
̂=̂̂̂̂δΩ′†
Ω U SR S DU Dok (19)
where D̂δcorresponds to a displacement operator dependent
ond ⃗,ŜΩ′(ŜΩ) a squeezing operator whose parameters depend
on the harmonic angular frequencies of the transition, and R̂Ua
rotation corresponding to UDus.235The distribution of non-
trivial transition amplitudes ωat 0 K gives rise to the FCP,
∑∑ ωδ ω ω=| ⟨ || ⟩ | − ′ Umm FCP( ) 0
kN
kk
mDok2
vibi
kjjjjjjy
{zzzzzz
(20)
where |0⟩is the ground state of the initial vibronic potential
and |m⟩is an eigenmode of the ﬁnal vibronic potential of
eigenenergies m=(m1, ..., mM), where M=3N−6 is the
number of degrees of freedom (vibronic modes) in an N-atom
molecule. The set { mk} consists of all possible con ﬁgurations of
phonons leading to allowed transitions of energy ωvib. The
inner product ⟨m|UDok|0⟩, known as the Franck −Condon
integral, is thus a product-sum over the all phononconﬁgurations contributing to ω. This product-sum corre-
sponds to the computation of the hafnian of a matrix. The
hafnian is operationally a function which takes as input anadjacency matrix and outputs the number of perfect matches inthe graph (for matrices with real or complex valued entries, thisidea can be extended by considering each edge of the graph tohave weights). If a matrix is bipartite, with an equal number ofvertices in each partition, the hafnian corresponds to thecomputation of a matrix permanent . Rather than discussing the
hafnian directly, we will fo cus our discussion on the
permanent, which is a more familiar object than the hafnian(we further note that the two are characterized by the samecomplexity class, so we lose little by making this reduction).The permanent of an n×nmatrix Mis deﬁned by
∑∏=
σσ
∈=Mm perm( )
Sin
ii
1,( )
n (21)
which has a de ﬁnition similar to the determinant ofM, minus
an additional product of each term with sgn( σ). Colloquially,the permanent is often described as the “determinant with all +
signs ”.
Despite the permanent ’s similarity to the determinant, the
two functions in general exhibit dramatically di ﬀerent
complexities. While the determinant can be e ﬃciently
computed (in O(n3) steps) by reduction to row-echelon
form via elementary row operations (called Gaussian
elimination ), the permanent of a matrix is not invariant under
row operations. Valiant236realized that the permanent was an
archetypal problem for a complexity class of countingproblems, which he coined #P. Recall that NPproblems can
be thought of as asking, “Does at least one satisfying
assignment exist for some criteria? ”Problems in #P, on the
other hand, are characterized by ﬁnding how many satisfying
assignments exist for the same criteria, a much more di ﬃcult
task. It then followed, Valiant showed, that an exact and
eﬃcient algorithm for permanent computation, even for a
matrix of only binary valued entries, would imply that P=NP.
The expectation is, then, that #Pproblems will be hard to
compute. Indeed, the best-known general algorithm today forexactly solving matrix permanents is that described byRyser,
237requiring at least O(n2n) operations.
It is important to realize that, although hafnians or matrix
permanents may be hard to compute or even estimate,determining the FCP is more precisely a sampling problem.That is, although the hardness of the permanent is a necessarycondition for the FCP sampling problem to be hard, it is notknown to be a su ﬃcient condition. There is, however,
compelling evidence in the literature to suggest that thesampling problem as such is indeed hard as well. Particularinstances of the FCP reduce to an instance of the recentlydeveloped linear optics architecture, boson sampling.
77,238−243
This prompted Huh et al.244to devise an algorithm (developed
further by Huh and Yung245) for sampling from the FCP using
an optical quantum computer, which is summarized in section
5.3.2.
It remains unclear whether the family of chemically relevant
problems is generally in the set of instances for which anoptical quantum computer could signi ﬁcantly speed up the
calculation. Complexity-theoretic results hold for average-caseHaar-random or Gaussian-ra ndom unitary matrices, but
chemical problems do not correspond to choosing randomlyfrom these sets. This is consistent with classical algorithmicapproaches whose techniques leverage approximations thattake into account the physical symmetries of the system togenerate solutions.
246However, these techniques will only give
eﬃcient and accurate solutions in some problem instances
where the approximations are valid. It remains to be seen
whether an e ﬃcient and fully generalizable classical approach
exists. While the search for this approach continues, there isroom for quantum computers to tackle the hardest of thesechemical problems.
4. QUANTUM SIMULATION ALGORITHMS FOR
FAULT-TOLERANT QUANTUM COMPUTERS
Quantum computation was born out of the idea that a
controllable quantum system could be used to simulate the
dynamics of a di ﬀerent quantum system. As described in the
previous section, it has been shown that a quantum computerconsisting of quantum bits and elementary unitary operationscan solve the computational problem of simulating unitaryevolution for a physically realistic system e ﬃciently (cf. Table
1). The purpose of this section is to provide a motivatingChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510869


--- PAGE 15 ---
narrative, guiding the reader through the signi ﬁcant advances
in the ﬁeld of quantum simulation and its applications to the
electronic structure problem. These advances have carried theidea of quantum simulation from a theoretical proposal to thepremier application of near-term quantum computers.
In its simplest form, quantum simulation entails two steps.
First, the quantum system of interest must be mapped onto thequbits of the quantum computer. Second, the unitary evolutionof the simulated system must be translated into a sequence ofelementary operations. The original proposals of quantumsimulation in the early 1980s, by Manin
46and Feynman,247
were motivated by the ine ﬃciency of simulating quantum
systems using classical processors. Their revolutionary idea wasthat, while the scaling of the number of classical bits needed to
store a wave function of Nquantum systems grows as
O(exp( N)), the scaling of quantum bits needed to store this
wave function is O(N). [Note: Here the notation O(N)
indicates an asymptotic upper bound on the scaling of thealgorithm that is linear in N. A tilde on top of the bound
notation, e.g., Õ(N), indicates suppression of poly-logarithmic
factors. In contrast to formally rigorous bounds, a tilde insideof a bound, e.g., O(∼N), indicates the bound is obtained
empirically.] The caveat is that the amplitudes of a wavefunction stored in quantum bits cannot be e ﬃciently accessed.
Obtaining a classical description of the quantum state would
require repeated quantum simulation and tomography, which
essentially eliminates all the savings. Instead, one can usequantum simulation to compu te expectation values of
observables,
40sample from a given distribution,76or use the
simulation as a subroutine in more complicated quantumalgorithms.248,249
In this setting, quantum computers can provide an
exponential improvement in memory resources for quantum
simulation compared to a naive approach using a wavefunction. Of course, there are classical methods for computingexpectation values that do not require storing the wavefunction, but the ability to manipulate a discretization of thewave function directly opened a ﬂoodgate of new results in
quantum algorithms for quantum chemistry.
50,52,53,88,250
It is important that the wave function can be e ﬃciently
evolved in time for many “physically realistic ”Hamiltonians.50
That is, with respect to a desired accuracy and duration of the
time evolution, the number of quantum gates (roughly,computation time) grows polynomially in system size, time,and inverse precision. In practice, we are interested not only inthe scaling but also in the actual amount of resources neededto execute an algorithm. Over the years, requirements forquantum simulation of a real-world system have been steadilylowered. The state-of-the-art quantum algorithms achievescaling roughly logarithmic in inverse precision and linear in
time. We review the progress in quantum simulations in
section 4.1 .
In quantum chemistry, it is relatively uncommon to directly
simulate the dynamics of a quantum wave function. Instead,the standard task is to determine the ground-state energy of aquantum system. Solving such an eigenvalue problem exactly isa much more challenging problem than the Hamiltonian
simulation. In fact, this problem is known to be QMA -
complete for a general Hamiltonian, as discussed in section 3 .
However, there are several assumptions that make this problemeasier for realistic systems, as discussed in section 3 .
The quantum algorithms that we discuss in this section were
designed for quantum computers that function without error.In practice, quantum computers are error-prone due to both
imprecision of processes and unwanted interaction with theenvironment. These defects limit the length of the programs
that can be accurately executed. The algorithms described in
this section are typically beyond this limit. Thus, only proof-of-principle demonstrations for simple problems have beenexecuted thus far.
64,251−253
Given the di ﬃculty to engineer precise gates and stable
qubits, one might be skeptical about the prospect of quantum
algorithms requiring coherence. However, it is possible to
correct the errors, and the system of detecting and correctingfor errors is called an error-correcting code .254In brief, the
principle behind quantum error correction is to use more
physical qubits to establish a set of fewer but higher- ﬁdelity
equivalent qubits called logical qubits .255A rough, conservative
estimate for the ratio of physical to logical qubits needed forreliable quantum computation is 10 000:1,254but this depends
on the realization of physical qubits, type of noise, and the
properties of the error correcting code. Su ﬃcient detection and
recovery from errors leads to a regime known as fault-tolerance ,
which o ﬀers the enticing prospect of executing an arbitrarily
long circuit without sacri ﬁcing accuracy.256
The emphasis on fault-tolerance is important for this section
because here we focus on quantum algorithms which assume
the underlying quantum computer is fault-tolerant. In section 5
we will discuss quantum algorithms for quantum chemistrywhich, a priori , do not require quantum error correction
because of more shallow circuits. The remainder of this section
is organized as follows (see also Figure 1 ). In section 4.1 we
discuss techniques for simulating general quantum systems ona quantum computer, which involves simulating time evolutionunder a given Hamiltonian ( section 4.1.1 ) as well as other
components needed for extracting the spectrum of the
Hamiltonian by phase estimation ( sections 4.1.2 and4.1.3).
Insection 4.2 we discuss applications of these techniques to
quantum chemistry problems. Section 4.2 is further split into
three subsections corresponding to high-level components of aquantum algorithm for quantum chemistry. In section 4.2.1 we
discuss methods for preparing the initial states for an
algorithm. Next, we consider simulation methods in section
4.2.2, and we conclude with methods for e ﬃciently extracting
useful information out of an algorithm in section 4.2.3 .
4.1. Quantum Algorithms for Energy Estimation
The observation that quantum systems appear to be di ﬃcult to
simulate was one of the forces driving early quantumcomputing research. Togeth er with the algorithm for
factoring,35Hamiltonian simulation50was one of the landmark
achievements of quantum algorithms in the 1990s. Quantum
simulations are closely connected to other quantum computingschemes such as linear systems,257thermal state generation,258
and quantum machine learning.259−261In addition, Hamil-
tonian simulation together with phase estimation can be used
for estimating eigenvalues.
4.1.1. General Hamiltonian Simulation. We begin our
discussion of Hamiltonian simulation by describing thebreakthrough paper by Lloyd,50which laid the theoretical
foundation for much of the later work in this ﬁeld. As
described above, while the works of Manin46and Feynman247
proposed the idea of quantum computers for solving the
memory storage issue with quantum simulation, the work ofLloyd gave a rigorous upper bound on the computational timefor quantum simulation. We emphasize that Lloyd ’s resultChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510870


--- PAGE 16 ---
applies to a particular approach to quantum simulation, known
as gate-based or digital quantum simulation . This approach is
distinct from an analog quantum simulation , for which there
have been several recent ground-breaking experi-ments.25,262−265
In an analog quantum simulation, the physical Hamiltonian
of the controllable quantum system is engineered tocorrespond directly to the Hamiltonian of the system ofinterest. In a digital Hamiltonian simulation, the dynamics ofthe targeted system are approximated by a sequence ofelementary quantum gates. We give a brief overview ofquantum gates (see Appendix C.4 ) but recommend the book
by Nielsen and Chuang
1for a reader unfamiliar with this
formalism. The advantage of the digital simulation approach isits aim for universality : any feasible Hamiltonian can be
digitally simulated. Unless otherwise stated, by “Hamiltonian
simulation ”we mean digital Hamiltonian simulation of a
closed quantum system under a time-independent Hamil-tonian.
Informally, the task of Hamiltonian simulation is to
construct a sequence of quantum gates which approximatethe Hamiltonian evolution of an input state under the action ofthe operator e
−iHt. For an arbitrary Hamiltonian H, the number
of elementary gates needed to construct U(t)=e−iHtgrows
exponentially with the number of qubits.1Accordingly, Lloyd ’s
result, or any other e ﬃcient Hamiltonian simulation algorithm,
requires the simulated Hamiltonian to have a special structure.The structure assumed in Lloyd ’sa n a l y s i si st h a tt h e
Hamiltonian describes only local interactions . That is, the
Hamiltonian of interest is mapped to an N-qubit Hamiltonian
which takes the form
∑=
=H H
jj
1S
(22)
where each Hjacts on at most kqubits and each e−iHjΔtis easy
to implement for a short time segment Δt.
The local interaction assumption leads to a quantum
algorithm for approximating the time dynamics. The keyinsight is to use the Trotter decomposition to approximate the
exact evolution as U(t)≈(e
−iH1t/n... e−iHlt/n)n. From the local
interactions assumption, each of the factors e−iHjt/nis a unitary
which acts on a constant number of qubits (i.e., independent ofN). These local unitary transformations can, in principle, be
decomposed into a number of elementary gates that isindependent of N.
The formal result from Lloyd ’s paper is that, for a
Hamiltonian of
Sterms describing k-body interactions, U(t)
can be approximated within error ϵby a sequence of O(Sτ2/ϵ)
elementary quantum gates,50,266where we de ﬁneτ≡||H||tand
ϵ≡||U(t)−Ũ(t)||∞, and Ũ(t) is the approximate evolution
operator. Assuming that the number of terms Sin the
Hamiltonian scales polynomially with the system size N
(such as the number of particles or the number of qubits), thenthe scaling of the number of gates is polynomial in N,τ, and 1/
ϵ. Thus, the Trotter decomposition for local-interaction
Hamiltonian simulation is e ﬃcient. It is worth noting that
Lloyd also gives an algorithm for simulating open-systemdynamics. Following this ﬁrst algorithm for digital quantum
simulation, several questions drove the ﬁeld of quantum
simulation:
•Does there exist an algorithm for Hamiltonians which
are not necessarily local?•Is it possible to improve the scaling in terms of t,1 /ϵ,
and the norm of the Hamiltonian ||H||?
•Can we move beyond Hamiltonian evolution and
implement evolution of open systems or evolution
under a time-dependent Hamiltonian?
•C a nw ee x p l o i ts t r u c t u r ei nq u a n t u mc h e m i s t r y
Hamiltonians to improve algorithmic performance?
This last question, in particular, has led to major advances in
quantum simulation for quantum chemistry and will be thefocus of section 4.2.2 Butﬁrst, we will brie ﬂy review the major
advances in the ﬁeld of general Hamiltonian simulation.
Dodd et al.
267and Nielsen et al.268built on the work of
Lloyd50and gave algorithms for simulating Hamiltonians that
are a sum of tensor products of Pauli matrices. Independently,Aharonov and Ta-Shma269introduced the sparse Hamiltonian
paradigm and thus addressed the ﬁrst two questions above.
This approach provides a means for e ﬃciently simulating (i.e.,
with gate count poly( N,t,1 /ϵ,d)) Hamiltonians which have
fewer than dentries in each column ( d-sparse) and includes
local Hamiltonians as a special case. A sparse Hamiltonian is aHamiltonian for which d∈poly( n). It is natural to ask how to
represent such a Hamiltonian, since storing (an exponentialnumber of) the coe ﬃcients in memory would require an
exponential overhead. Indeed, one needs to have a way of
eﬃciently computing these coe ﬃcients in superposition.
Instead of constraining ourselves to one implementation, it iscustomary to assume access to the Hamiltonian throughoracles:
|⟩ = |⊕ ⟩ Okrz krz l,, ,,loc (23)
|⟩ = |⊕ ⟩ Olrz lrz H,, ,,lr val , (24)
The oracle Oloclocates the column lof the kth non-zero
element in the row r. The oracle Ovalthen gives the (non-zero)
value of the matrix element Hr,l. Both oracles are, by
construction, involutory and therefore unitary.
If such oracles can be constructed from a polynomial
number of elementary gates, we say that the Hamiltonian isrow-computable. An important subclass of d-sparse Hamil-
tonians are d-local Hamiltonians. A Hamiltonian is d-local if it
can be written as a sum of polynomially (in the number ofqubits) many terms where each term acts non-trivially on atmost dqubits. Depending on the context, the qubit may or
may not be spatially close. As such, many physically relevantHamiltonians are sparse
270or even local.201,271
Several other oracles are used in Hamiltonian simulation
literature. Childs and Wiebe272introduced the unitary access
oracle. In this model, the Hamiltonian is represented as a linearcombination of unitaries H=∑
j=0L−1αjVj. For an e ﬃcient
simulation, L∈poly( N), and therefore the coe ﬃcients αjcan
be represented classically. The unitaries Vjare given through
an oracle,
ψψ|⟩| ⟩=|⟩ | ⟩ Vj j V select( )j (25)
that acts directly on the data. Berry et al.202showed that one
query to select( V) can be implemented with d2calls to Olocand
Oval. Tensor products of Pauli matrices are a special case of the
unitaries Vj.
Later, Low and Chuang204introduced the signal oracle
Usignalsuch that, in a subspace ﬂagged by an ancilla in a signal
state |G⟩,H=⟨G|Usignal|G⟩. This case arises from a linear
combination of unitaries. Other Hamiltonian access modelsChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510871


--- PAGE 17 ---
include e ﬃciently index-computable Hamiltonians,273special
data structures,274and Hamiltonians encoded into a density
matrix as a quantum software state .260,275Since a density matrix
is Hermitian, it is possible to exponentiate it and use the resultfor generating time evolution. While not commonly used inquantum chemistry yet, density matrix exponentiation has
been used in multiple quantum machine learning algo-
rithms.
260
We estimate the cost of the Hamiltonian simulation in terms
of the number of calls or queries to these oracles as well as the
number of gates. Since each query requires a construction ofthe Hamiltonian, query complexity often dominates the cost of
an algorithm. The concept of an oracle provides a useful
abstraction for designing algorithms for a wide spectrum ofHamiltonians. In practice, however, it is not always necessaryto explicitly construct an oracle directly if the Hamiltonian hasa structure that can be exploited directly. An example of such astructure is a sum of Pauli terms.
203,211,276Along the line of
oracular versus non-oracular approaches, we review the resultsin Hamiltonian simulations following two di ﬀerent avenues.
In the ﬁrst one, the Hamiltonian is ﬁrst decomposed into a
sum of terms H=∑
jHj, where each eiHjtcan be implemented
directly, and use a Trotter decomposition to approximate theevolution under the sum of Hamiltonians.269These
approaches are typically referred to as product formula
algorithms. The original Aharonov and Ta-Shma work269
established a query complexity of O(poly( N,d)(τ2/ϵ)), which
matches the gate complexity of Lloyd ’s algorithm but applies to
a broader class of d-sparse Hamiltonians.266This set the stage
for a wave of improvements in the query complexity. First, by
more sophisticated Trotter −Suzuki decompositions,277the
approximation error can be made to depend on progressivelyhigher orders in τ.211,276,277Intuitively, one can achieve a more
favorable error scaling by using more precise approximationsfor the exponential of a sum. In the simplest case, thesymmetric Trotter formula e
(A+B)Δt≈eAΔt/2eBΔteAΔt/2
suppresses O(Δt2) errors. Second, by considering more
favorable schemes for Hamiltonian decomposition,272,273
most modern-day simulation algorithms scale in terms of
τmax=t||H||maxinstead of τ, where ||H||maxis the absolute value
of the largest entry of Has a matrix in the computational basis.
The second approach comes from the equivalence between
continuous- and discrete-time quantum walks.278This work
improved the dependence on time and sparsity but did notmatch the error scaling of contemporaneous algorithms. Unlike
t h ep r e v i o u sr e s u l t s ,i td i dn o tr e l yo nH a m i l t o n i a n
decomposition and it can be used for certain non-sparseHamiltonians. Childs and Berry
278,279showed that, given
oracle access to a Hamiltonian with eigenvalues λ, one can
construct a unitary quantum walk operator with eigenvaluese
±iarcsin λ. The computationally di ﬃcult part is to uncompute
the arcsin in the phase. This is done by estimating the phasearcsin λusing phase estimation and coherently applying the sin
function onto the phase. The use of phase estimation isresponsible for a relatively poor scaling in the error ϵ.
While these algorithms reduced the asymptotic complexity
of Hamiltonian simulation, this came at the cost of increasedsophistication of the methods. A breakthrough in quantumsimulation methods came in 2014, when Berry et al. presentedan algorithm that exponentially improved the dependence onprecision.
202As e r i e so fi m p r o v e m e n t sr e s u l t e di nt h e
development of a relatively straightforward technique, which
considers a decomposition of the Hamiltonian into a linearcombination of unitary operators (LCUs), H=∑jαjUj.203The
Hamiltonian evolution is ﬁrst divided into shorter segments.
Then, each segment is approximated by a truncated Taylorseries,
∑∑ α ≈−Δ
!−Δ
=it
kU e() iH t
kK
jjjk
0i
kjjjjjjjy
{zzzzzzz
(26)
which itself is a LCU. A technique called oblivious amplitude
amplification202is then used to turn black-box implementa-
tions of the individual unit aries into a desired linear
combination. Oblivious amplitude ampli ﬁcation allowed for
the implementation of algorithms based on existing proba-bilistic schemes272with near-perfect success. LCU has a query
complexity of ττ
τϵ
ϵ ()Odd
d2 log( / )
log log( / )2
max
2
max,w h i c hi so p t i m a li n
inverse precision. This approach is particularly appealing for
quantum chemistry application, where each Ujis a tensor
product of Pauli matrices. These Hamiltonians can beimplemented without the u se of oracles requiring
+ϵ
ϵ ()OTLn L T
T( log )log( / )
log log( / )gates, where nis the number of qubits
in the simulated system, Lis the number of terms in the
Hamiltonian, and T=∑j=0L−1αj.
The major open question was whether this query complexity
scaling could be reduced to being additive in its τand ϵ
dependence, rather than multiplicative. Such a dependence wasknown to be a lower bound on the asymptotic querycomplexity.
202In 2016, Low and Chuang developed algorithms
based on quantum signal processing205andqubitization204which
achieve this provably optimal asymptotic scaling in query
complexity of τ+ϵ
ϵ ()Odmaxlog(1 / )
log log(1 / ), achieving the sought-
after “additive ”approximation error.
Quantum signal processing refers to the ability to transform
a unitary W=∑λeiθλ|uλ⟩⟨uλ|as
∑→= | ⟩ ⟨ |
λθ
λλλ WV u u eih
ideal()
(27)
for any real function h. Using the phase-kickback trick,280one
can modify the spectrum by manipulating an ancilla qubit. Thetransformation is then implemented through single-qubitrotations on the ancilla and repeated applications of control-W. Low et al.
281fully characterized the transformations that
can be implemented this way. In short, the transformations areﬁrst approximated by a tuple of polynomials whose degree
determines the query complexity of the algorithm. If thepolynomials form an achievable tuple , they can be turned into
single-qubit rotations and implemented through quantumsignal processing.
Since the walk operator given by Childs and Kothari
273has
eigenvalues e±iarcsin λ,w h e r e λis an eigenvalue of the
Hamiltonian, h(θ)=−τsin(θ) gives time evolution. The
transformation is approximated by the Jacobi −Anger ex-
pansion that satis ﬁes the criteria of achievability and its
quick convergence results in the optimal scaling of thealgorithm. Qubitization282takes these ideas one step further
and explains how to combine LCU with quantum signalprocessing. The core of this idea is to modify the signal oracleto obtain two-dimensional invariant subspaces analogous tothe construction in Grover ’s algorithm.
38Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510872


--- PAGE 18 ---
The quantum signal processing approach was later simpli ﬁed
and generalized into singular value transformations by Gilye ́n
et al.283and can be applied to a wide array of applications
beyond quantum simulation. More recent work has focused onthe possibility of improvements in the scaling with di ﬀerent
norms of the Hamiltonian and spectral ampli ﬁcation.282,284
Low and Wiebe212introduced Hamiltonian simulation in
the interaction picture. A Hamiltonian with components H=A
+Bcan be transformed into an interaction picture
Hamiltonian as HI(t)=eiAtBe−iAt. The time evolution in the
interaction picture then corresponds to the evolution under atime-dependent Hamiltonian H
I(t). The dominant scaling
comes from simulating the interaction terms Bwhile Ais
chosen to be a part of the Hamiltonian that is easy to simulate.
If the norm of Ais much larger than the norm of B, say for a
diagonally dominant matrix, interaction picture simulations canlead to an exponential improvement over existing techniques.Recently, Low
282combined multiple methods204,205,212to
further improve scaling with respect to the norm of theHamiltonian. This approach improves the dependence onsparsity by utilizing information about the spectral norm.
Quantum simulation algorithms have been developed in
other important dynamical regimes. The work of Wang andWossnig
285and Kimmel et al.275considered simulation of non-
sparse Hamiltonians. Advances paralleling the time-independ-ent results have been carried out for time-dependentHamiltonians using Trotter −Suzuki decompositions.
286,287
Very recently, a truncated Dyson series algorithm was
developed214which achieves the logarithmic scaling in inverse
precision, analogous to the truncated Taylor series method fortime-independent simulation.
Beyond unitary dynamics, a small line of inquiry has
investigated general algorithms for open quantum dynamics,beginning with the case of local Markovian (or local Lindblad)dynamics.
288Algorithms with improved scaling were recently
developed, drawing on techniques from unitary simulationsuch as improved product decompositions, sparse Hamiltonianmethods, and the LCU approach.
209,210
I ti sq u i t er e m a r k a b l et h a t algorithms with optimal
asymptotic scaling have been discovered. In practice, however,we must consider the exact gate counts to determine whichalgorithm is the best in a particular instance. A recent study
289
showed that di ﬀerent algorithms fare better in di ﬀerent
regimes. In particular, produ ct-formula-based algorithms
required fewer resources than quantum signal processing in anumerical simulation for systems between 10 and 100 qubits.Insection 4.2 , we will turn to such considerations in the
context of Hamiltonian simulation for quantum chemistry.
4.1.2. Quantum Phase Estimation (QPE). Hamiltonian
simulation is rarely used as a standalone algorithm. For thepurposes of quantum chemistry, its main application is as asubroutine in the QPEA,
248,280which is sometimes referred to
as the “von Neumann trick ”.290It gives an exponential
advantage to many of the algorithms reviewed in the nextsection. Given a unitary operator e
iΦand an approximate
eigenstate of that operator prepared on the quantum computer,
the QPEA is used to e ﬃciently output a binary representation
of the corresponding phase Φ. In our case, the operator
corresponds to a unitary evolution eiHt, and phase estimation is
used to extract information about the spectrum of theHamiltonian.
A circuit representation of the algorithm is shown in Figure
3. The QPEA uses two separate registers of qubits.Theﬁrst register of Tancilla qubits is used to read out the
binary representation of λ
m. For simplicity, assume that the
state |ψm⟩in the second register is an eigenstate of the unitary
Ufor which we want to compute the eigenenergy λm.
After each ancilla qubit is initialized in the state |0⟩,a
Hadamard gate is applied to each to prepare this register in anequal superposition of all computational basis states
∑|⟩xx1
2T. In the ﬁrst step of reading out λm, the phase
(e−iλmt)2kis imprinted on the kth ancilla qubit as
ψψ|⟩+|⟩| ⟩→|⟩+ |⟩| ⟩λ−(01 ) ( 0 e 1 )mit
m2k
m(28)
This is achieved via “phase-kickback ”37,280by applying a
controlled- U2kbetween this qubit and the state preparation
register in |ψm⟩. Finally, the inverse quantum Fourier transform
(see section 4.1.3 ) is applied to the ancilla register to convert
the state to a computational basis state, |x1x2...xT⟩, that
expresses the binary representation of λmt/2π≈0:x1x2...xT.
After execution of the algorithm, measurement of the ﬁrst
register will yield a binary approximation of the eigenenergy λm
with a high probability. It can be shown that, with probability
at least 1 −ϵ, the estimation of λmis accurate to
−+ϵ ( ) () T log 21
2Ä
ÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÉ
ÑÑÑÑÑÑÑ
bits.1Roughly speaking, each ancilla
adds another digit of accuracy.
Let us now examine the case when the second register is not
an eigenstate but rather a superposition ∑mam|ψ⟩. One can
perform the above analysis and convince oneself that phaseestimation will yield ∑
mam|λ̃mt/2π⟩|ψm⟩, where λ̃mis an
approximation of the eigenenergy λm. After measurement of
theﬁrst register, the second register will collapse in the
corresponding eigenstate. The probability of obtaining the
eigenstate λmis|am|2, i.e., the squared overlap between the
eigenstate with the prepared superposition. Therefore, it ispossible to obtain multiple eigenstates and eigenenergies of H
by running QPEA repeatedly with an appropriately choseninitial state |ϕ⟩, highlighting the importance of the state
preparation step, as discussed in section 4.2.1 .
QPEA is closely linked to Hamiltonian simulation
algorithms because of the controlled- U
2ktransformations.
Each of these transformations can be decomposed into a
sequence of gates by ﬁrst decomposing U2kinto a sequence ofFigure 3. Circuit performing QPE with three ancilla qubits. First, the
Hadamard gate (labeled “Had ”) is applied on each ancilla qubit to
create a uniform superposition. Next, a series of controlled operations
Uthat corresponds to Hamiltonian evolution e−iHtare applied.
Finally, the inverse QFT is used, see section 4.1.3 The input is given
by one register (consisting of the top three qubits in this speci ﬁc
diagram) initialized to zero and a second register containing the
desired eigenstate of H. (The general case where the second register
contains a superposition of eigenstates is discussed in the main text.)
After execution, the ﬁrst register stores an approximation of the
eigenenergy of |ψm⟩. Please see Appendix C.4 or ref 1for an
introduction to quantum circuits.Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510873


--- PAGE 19 ---
gates using Hamiltonian simulation methods from section 4.1 ,
and then augmenting each gate into a controlled gate with a
certain ancilla qubit. Accordingly, advances in quantum
algorithms for Hamiltonian simulation lead to improvements
in the performance of QPEA. We note, however, that certain
methods, such as quantum random access memory (quantum
RAM),291could provide an alternative means of implementing
the powers of controlled unitaries.
In the standard QPEA, the precision of the estimated
eigenvalue is determined by the number of ancilla qubits. As
detailed by Aspuru-Guzik et al.41and Dobs ̌ı́ček et al.,292the
number of ancilla qubits can be greatly reduced while
maintaining the same precision by using the iterative quantum
phase estimation algorithm (IPEA). Feeding back on the
rotation angle of the quantum gates, the phase estimation is
improved in each step.
Further improvements to the QPEA have been made,293
including the introduction of Bayesian inference techniques.294
In this way, the maximum amount of information is extracted
from previous measurements in order to inform the rotation
angles for the next evaluation of the algorithm. Wiebe and
Granade294have shown that the eigenenergy and its
uncertainty can thus be inferred directly rather than iteratively.
This Bayesian estimation approach to QPE has recently been
shown experimentally,295demonstrating its robustness to noise
and decoherence.
The use of the time evolution operator in phase estimation is
not necessary for the QPEA. Recent work296−298has
investigated the use of unitaries which encode the spectrum
of the Hamiltonian but are easier to implement than e−iHt.A s
long as the alternative unitary is determined by a known
invertible function fof the Hamiltonian, as e−if(H)t, then the
measured eigenphase of this unitary can be used to infer the
corresponding eigenvalue of H. The unitary eiarccos( H/λ)can be
implemented using a quantum walk operator,204which
requires fewer gates than time evolution.
The cost of performing QPE depends on the cost of
implementing the operation U=e−if(H)tand the desired error
in the estimate of the eigenvalues of H,ϵ.Uis usually
implemented by repeating a circuit primitive many times inorder to achieve certain accuracy, as illustrated in the previous
section for the implementation of e
−if(H)t. Designating g(ϵ)a s
the number of repetitions required for achieving error O(ϵ)i n
the spectrum of Hencoded through f(H), we can write the
cost of phase estimation as || ′ ||ϵ
ϵ−()O fH()Cg() 1,298where Cis
the cost of implementing a primitive of U,||·||denotes the
spectral norm, and ||f′(H)||is the derivative of the function of
the eigenvalues in the operation f(H). Therefore, the particular
choice of f(H) determines the ﬁnal cost of the phase estimation
algorithm procedure. Babbush et al.298presented a comparison
of the cost of implementing QPEA for di ﬀerent proposals of
f(H).
4.1.3. Quantum Fouri er Transform (QFT). Many
important quantum algorithms, including Shor ’s factoring
algorithm,35rely on QFT299as a subroutine. The QFT
underlies the problem of Forrelation,300which is said to
“capture the maximal power of quantum computation ”.I nt h e
context of the QPEA, the QFT is the ﬁnal step before
measuring the ancilla qubits that carry the binary representa-
tion of the energy estimate. After the various powers of the
eigenphases have been applied to the ancilla qubits (cf. Figure3), the QFT is used to convert these powers of phases into a
binary representation of the eigenenergy on these qubits.
The QFT operation can be understood as a unitary change
of basis from the computational basis to the Fourier basis.Mathematically, it closely resembles its classical counterpart,the discrete Fourier transform. Given an orthonormal basis |0⟩,
|1⟩, ...,|N−1⟩, the action of the QFT on a basis state |j⟩is given
by
∑|⟩= |⟩π
=−
jNk QFT1e
kN
ijk N
01
2/
(29)
We now change to a binary representation j=j12n−1+j22n−2+
... +jn2°≕j1j2...jnwith nbits, where N=2n. This allows us to
write the state |j⟩as a multi-qubit state, |j1,j2, ..., jn⟩. The
Fourier transform now assumes the following form:
|⟩ =
|⟩+ |⟩|⟩+ |⟩ |⟩+ |⟩ππ π−jj j QFT , , ...,
( 0 e 1 )( 0 e 1 )...( 0 e 1 )
2n
ij ij j ij j j
n12
20 . 20 . 20 . . . .
/2nn n n 11 2
(30)
Here, the terms 0. j1j2...jndenote a binary fraction.
Computing the QFT requires a sequence of Hadamard gates
and controlled rotations. In Figure 4 , we show this circuit for
four qubits. The following operations are applied to each qubit,
successively from top to bottom qubit: a Hadamard gatefollowed by rotations R
kthat are controlled by the qubits
below. The rotation angle of the gate Rkis given by e2πi/2k.A s
indicated in the ﬁgure, the ﬁnal state of the register is equal to
eq 30 up to a reversal of the qubit state order. Although this
circuit is complex and dense, it often serves merely as asubroutine within other algorithms. It will usually be written as“QFT ”or “FT ”in circuit diagrams. The inverse Fourier
transform, given by the Hermitian conjugate QFT
†, is at least
as ubiquitous.
Griﬃths and Niu301introduced a semiclassical version of
QFT that replaces two-qubit gates by adaptive measurementsand single-qubit gates. The algorithm was subsequentlyimproved and implemented by Higgins et al.
302
The QFT has also found application in simulating chemical
dynamics. The quantum “split-operator ”method88,290is
analogous to classical exact wave function simulation
techniques such as matching pursuit/split-operator Fourier
transform.189During simulation, the kinetic and interaction/
potential energy terms can both be implemented diagonally byapplying the QFT to change between the momentum andposition basis. It has been shown that this technique leads toquantum speed-ups for both ﬁrst- and second-quantized
problem formulations.
52,88,270,303Figure 4. Quantum Fourier transform circuit for four qubits,
reproduced from Nielsen and Chuang.1SWAP gates that reverse
the order of the states at the end are not shown. The Hadamard gates
are labeled “Had ”, gates Rkindicate a rotation over the angle e2πi/2k,
and 0. j1j2...jndenotes a binary fraction.Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510874


--- PAGE 20 ---
4.2. Determining the Ground-State Energies of Quantum
Chemistry Hamiltonians
Beneath the massive computational resources devoted to
determining properties of molecules and materials lies the
electronic structure problem. The importance of this problemderives from the fact that the quantum mechanicaleigenenergies and wave functions of the electrons in a
molecular system are essential for understanding and
predicting industry-relevant quantities, including reactionrates, binding energies, and molecular pathways. In particular,the ground-state energy as a function of the nuclear
coordinates (the ground-state energy manifold) of a molecular
system is su ﬃcient for gleaning many of these properties.
In the late 1990s, quantum computing scientists began to
develop approaches for estimating static properties ofmolecular systems using techniques for simulating timedynamics. The standard approach requires ﬁrst preparing the
quantum computer in the desired quantum state (e.g., an
approximation of the ground state of a molecular system) andthen extracting the properties of interest (e.g., the ground-stateenergy) using QPEA. We will review the development of
necessary techniques in this section.
4.2.1. State Preparation. Theﬁrst step of any quantum
algorithm is the preparation of an initial state. The success of
an algorithm for determining ground-state energy depends on
the quality of the state preparation. The ansatz for thepreparation comes from a classical approximation for a groundstate of a given Hamiltonian. Such a state must have two
properties. First, the ansatz needs to a have a signi ﬁcant
overlap with the ground state. Second, the state has to beeﬃciently preparable on a quantum computer. Examples of
state preparation include the HF state, states from coupled-
cluster methods, or states obtained using the method of
adiabatic quantum evolution. Quantum computers areparticularly useful when classical methods cannot provideanswers with high accuracy, such as for strongly correlated
systems.
In his pioneering work, Zalka
53considered discretizing the
wave function and initializing simulation through a series of
controlled rotations. Grover and Rudolph304gave a similar
algorithm to prepare a state corresponding to an e ﬃciently
integrable probability distribution. However, this would be acostly procedure in practice.
Abrams and Lloyd40focused on state preparation in more
detail and described concrete initialization procedures. They
pointed out that state preparation is conceptually easier in
second quantization, where a Fock state is represented by asimple product state of qubits in { |0⟩,|1⟩} states. Their
algorithm begins with all qubits reset to |0...0 ⟩. Fermi statistics
are automatically accoun ted for in the creation and
annihilation operators. In ﬁrst quantization, one must initialize
a completely anti-symmetric-state. Anti-symmetrization can beenforced by reversing a suitable sorting algorithm and
uncomputing ancillas to make the procedure reversible.
305
Recently, Berry et al.296improved the anti-symmetrization
procedure by using a sorting network and optimizingcomponents of the algorithm. This algorithm achieves a gatecount scaling of O(ηlogηlogN) and a circuit depth of
O(logηlog log N), where ηstands for the number of particles
andN≥ηfor the number of single-particle basis functions.
These are, respectively, a polynomial and an exponentialimprovement over the previous algorithm.The choice of the initial state for ground-state energy
estimation was considered by Aspuru-Guzik et al.
41HF is the
usual starting point for state preparation; however, it might notalways have a su ﬃcient overlap with the ground state. Tubman
et al.
306recently investigated the support of HF on the ground
state. For small molecules, HF provides a good approximationfor the ground state, for example, 0.77 for FeMoCo computedin a small active space.
306The applicability of other methods
was investigated in cases when HF fails. Wang et al.42
investigated preparing states which are generated with themulti-con ﬁgurational self-consistent ﬁeld (MCSCF) approach.
These states have non-zero overlap with a polynomial number
of computational basis states, for which there are e ﬃcient
methods of preparation.
307In addition to having better overlap
with the ground state, MCSCF states express the electroncorrelation needed to represent low-level excited states.
Kassal et al.
88combined state preparation with a proposal
for preparing the nuclear ground-state wave function to
investigate the simulation of a chemical reaction without theBOA. They conclude that simulating the complete nuclear andelectronic wave function in a chemical reaction of four or moreparticles is more e ﬃcient than using the BOA.
Recently, Tubman et al.
306,308introduced the adaptive
sampling con ﬁguration interaction (ASCI) method. ASCI
allows for the generation of a small number of determinantswhile accounting for at least 90% of the wave function. Sugisakiet al.
250extended the HF state preparation by proposing an
algorithm for e ﬃciently preparing an exponential number of
Slater determinants. Their proposal is particularly appealing forpreparing con ﬁguration state functions of open-shell mole-
cules.
Adiabatic state preparation (ASP), proposed by Aspuru-
Guzik et al.,
41is a method for transforming the initially
prepared HF state into an approximation of the FCI ground-
state wave function. The idea draws on the method of AQC309
(cf.section 5.3.1 ). ASP initializes the register in the HF state.
For a second-quantized Hamiltonian, the HF state may beprepared as a product state on the qubits and is, therefore, easyto prepare.
41The state is then evolved with respect to a circuit
that approximates an adiabatic change in the Hamiltonianstarting from the HF Hamiltonian and ending with the fullHamiltonian. The adiabatic evolution is then digitallysimulated with either a product formula decomposition
287or
a truncated Dyson series.212,214If the Hamiltonian and its ﬁrst
derivative are upper-bounded by a constant, then a goodapproximation of the ground state can be reached for evolution
time,
=γ()T O1
2, where γis the minimum gap (except for
pathological cases310). This is a so-called adiabatic regime,
where the evolved state has support at least 1 −()OT1on the
ground state.311A number of strategies can be used to increase
the support; see Wiebe and Babcock,312Lidar et al.,313and
Kieferova ́and Wiebe314for examples. Roland and Cerf315
proposed a method for reaching the adiabatic regime faster by
modifying the speed of Hamiltonian change throughout theevolution. Note that it is not always necessary to reach theadiabatic regime to achieve a signi ﬁcant overlap with the
ground state. Symmetries in the spectrum can be exploitedeven when the gap is exponentially small.
316Crosson et al.317
demonstrated that this e ﬀect is common even for instances
that do not exhibit noticeable symmetries. Standard quantumChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510875


--- PAGE 21 ---
chemistry methods can be used to lower-bound this gap41even
though exactly computing it can be demanding.
Insection 5 we will discuss several other state preparation
methods for second quantization which have been introducedfor the purpose of the VQE algorithm, but which also apply tothe QPEA.
Another possibility is to initialize the registers to
approximate a thermal state.
41While creating a thermal state
is a computationally di ﬃcult problem by itself, an approx-
imation may su ﬃce. Several quantum algorithms can be used
for accomplishing this task.258,283,318−321
4.2.2. Hamiltonian Simulation for Quantum Chem-
istry. Independently of Lloyd ’s quantum simulation algo-
rithm,50Zalka290introduced a quantum algorithm for
simulation of single- and many-body quantum systems. Zalkasuggested that a wave function can be discretized into an l-bit
quantum register. Green ’s function for a quantum particle is
then approximated by a product of exponentials with potentialand kinetic energy in the exponents. The term correspondingto potential energy is diagonal and thus relatively straightfor-ward to simulate. Kinetic energy terms can be diagonalizedusing the QFT. Zalka proposed to take similar steps for
simulating many-body systems and ﬁeld theories. Similar ideas
also appear in the work by Wiesner.
52
At the same time, Abrams and Lloyd112discussed the
subject of Hamiltonian simulation in ﬁrst and second
quantization in detail using Trotter decompositions andblock diagonalization. They pointed out that the Hamiltoniancan be expressed more easily in ﬁrst quantization but the basis
set necessary for expressing the quantum state is smaller insecond quantization.
Aspuru-Guzik et al.
41ﬁrst realized that quantum computers
can be used for determining ground-state energies. This worklays the grounds for further research in quantum simulationsfor quantum chemistry, discussing choices of chemical basis,Hamiltonian mapping, simulation, and energy estimation. Tomap a many-body system onto a discretized Hamiltonian, oneneeds to make several choices.
First, one must choose how to map the physical Hamiltonian
onto the qubits. The upshot is that the additional structure inthese Hamiltonians can be exploited to improve the perform-ance over general algorithms. Such improvements should alsotake constant overheads into account, which are necessary fordetermining the feasibility of running a useful instance of aproblem.
Second, in traditional quantum chemistry, it is standard to
make several simpli ﬁcations to the Hamiltonian which yield a
ﬁnite-dimensional operator that can be handled more easily.
The BOA allows one to freeze out the slow-moving ionicdegrees of freedom, leaving only the important electronicdegrees of freedom. Up to a few exceptions, most quantumalgorithms work with this approximation.
Third, one needs to make a choice between ﬁrst and the
second quantization. Classical methods for simulating
evolution in the ﬁrst quantization are relatively rare because
of the di ﬃculty of storing the wave function.
Last, one needs to ﬁnd a suitable basis. The most common
choice of basis for simulating molecules are the Gaussian basissets of Pople quantum chemistry.
92,207,322The plane wave
basis was long seen as unsuitable because of the high numberof orbitals required for approximating a wave function butprovides a much simpler representation of the Hamiltonian.However, the recent improvement in the scaling in the numberof basis terms may make it a front-runner for quantum
chemistry quantum algorithms.
213,298,323,324Babbush et al.323
showed that the electronic structure Hamiltonian requires only
O(N2) terms in a plane wave basis while O(N4) terms are
necessary for Gaussians. Kivlichan et al. further re ﬁned this to
show that single Trotter steps of the electronic structureHamiltonian can be simulated in O(N) depth with only
nearest-neighbor connectivity on a line.324White325proposed
a so-called Gausslet set that combines Gaussian with wavelet
features.
The number of choices led to several avenues of research. In
second quantization, Whit ﬁeld et al.201used the Jordan −
Wigner transform to create a local Hamiltonian and gaveexplicit formulas to compute the matrix elements. Their
algorithm was then applied to H
2, decomposing the operations
into elementary gates and simulating their quantum algorithm.A similarly detailed study for LiH with quantum errorcorrection was performed by Jones et al.
326
Simulations in real space have also been proposed.88
Building on the work of Zalka53and Wiesner,52they use the
QFT to simulate the kinetic term in the Hamiltonian but
implement the gate sequence and give complexity estimates for
their algorithm.
Toloui and Love270chose a di ﬀerent approach and used
sparse matrix simulation techniques to evolve a state under theconﬁguration interaction matrix. The representation of the
Hamiltonian on the basis of Slater determinants (theconﬁguration interaction matrix) is sparse, and therefore
techniques from section 4.1 can be used for simulation. This
technique is also more space e ﬃcient compared to second
quantized techniques using Fock states.
While the above algorithms are e ﬃcient in terms of
asymptotic scaling, their practicality for modest-sized quantumcomputers remained unclear. The advent of quantumsimulators brought a number of landmark resource estimate
studies.
57,197,201Wecker et al.56investigated the quantum
computational resources needed to simulate a molecularHamiltonian with twice the number of orbitals that can behandled with classical methods. They paint an ambivalentpicture for the future of Hamiltonian simulation in chemistry.The pessimistic conclusion was that, while the required spatialresources (i.e., the number of qubits) were just an order ofmagnitude more than for current devices, the required timeresources demanded a quantum computer whose coherencetime was many orders of magnitude beyond the capabilities ofcurrent devices. The algorithm used in their analysis was a“naive Trotter decomposition ”, similar to the proposal of
Aspuru-Guzik et al.,
41which gives a gate count scaling of
O(N11) and an empirical scaling of O(N9). The optimistic
conclusion of this work, however, was that, through improvingquantum algorithms for Hamiltonian simulation, theserequired time resources could be drastically reduced.
The following years saw a sequence of developments
57,58,327
in analyzing and improving the asymptotic scaling of resources
needed for performing quantum chemical simulations on a
quantum computer, in terms of the numbers of electrons and
spin-orbitals. This work drastically reduced the requirementsoriginally estimated by Wecker et al.56
A series of papers showed how to merge sequential Jordan −
Wigner strings to reduce their cost from linear to constant aswell how to parallelize evolution under di ﬀerent terms in the
Hamiltonian.57Poulin et al.58empirically studied the cost of
simulation for real-world molecules, ﬁnding that the cost wasChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510876


--- PAGE 22 ---
closer to O(∼N6). Later, it was also demonstrated that the
Trotter errors depend on the maximum nuclear charge ratherthan the number of spin-orbitals.
59Subsequently, Reiher et
al.197carried out a detailed study of the computational cost,
including the number of costly gates for quantum error
correction, for FeMoCo, a model of the nitrogenase enzyme
that suggests that it is indeed feasible to employ future error-corrected architectures for the simulation of realistic chemicalsystems of scienti ﬁc and industrial interest using Trotter-based
approaches. The gate counts were further lowered thanks toadvancements in circuit synthesis
89,298,324,328,329and Hamil-
tonian simulations.203,204,212,283,287
Applications of LCU techniques203in second quantization
were studied by Babbush et al.207and in ﬁrst quantization also
by Babbush et al.206These techniques exponentially increased
the precision of the Hamiltonian simulation. In second
quantization, the number of gates required is Õ(N5). In ﬁrst
quantization, it is Õ(η2N3), where ηis the number of particles
in the system. Importantly, these early LCU-based algorithmshave been shown to scale better asymptotically as a function ofmolecule size than prior Trotter algorithms for quantumsimulation. The same scaling holds for the qubitization
paradigm with better constant factors.
204
Concepts such as wave function locality327can be
introduced to further reduce the cost in terms of quantumgates for molecular simulation. The combination of these ideaswith sparse algorithms and an intelligent choice of basisfunctions has been shown to reduce the cost of quantumsimulation of chemical systems, but further improvements andgeneralizations may yet be possible. There are several ideasfrom the domain of classical molecular electronic structure thatcan be applied in the ﬁeld of quantum simulation for further
reduction of quantum computational cost.
Recent work has studied the chemistry simulation problem
in bases where the Coulomb operator is diagonal.
323,324This
allows a representation of the chemistry Hamiltonian with anumber of terms scaling quadratically in the number of spin-orbitals, a signi ﬁcant reduction in the number of terms in the
Hamiltonian when using MOs. This representation was ﬁrst
used to construct Trotter steps of the chemistry Hamiltonianrequiring only a grid of qubits with nearest-neighborconnectivity.
323Following this, it was shown that TrotterFigure 5. Chronological overview of quantum chemistry simulation algorithms. On the left-hand side we list quantum simulation algorithm
grouped by the techniques they use. The right-hand side outlines the improvement for time evolution in quantum chemistry. We indicate the
underlying simulation technique with an arrow from the left column to the right. Furthermore, we color-code the Hamiltonian representation:
yellow (lighter color) for ﬁrst quantization and red (darker color) for second quantization.Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510877


--- PAGE 23 ---
steps exactly Nlayers of gates deep (with Nthe number of
spin-orbitals) could be performed even with the restriction of
the qubits being on a line.324
This has led to particularly e ﬃcient simulation algorithms.
For real state simulations, Kivlichan et al.89simulated
interacting particles and achieved super-polynomially higher
accuracy than previous algorithms. Kivlichan et al.324gave an
algorithm linear in depth and quadratic in the number of two-qubit gates in terms of spin-orbitals. Soon after, Babbush etal.
298gave an algorithm which has been fully priced to the level
of fault-tolerant gates. This algorithm uses qubitization to
achieve Tcomplexity O(N+ log 1/ ϵ) for Hamiltonian
simulation and O(N3/ε+N2log 1/ ϵ) for energy estimation.
The most recent series of improvements in asymptotic
scaling was by Low and Wiebe212for second quantization and
Babbush et al.213forﬁrst quantization. Both results use
interaction picture simulations212and plane wave basis.
Simulation in the ﬁrst quantization gives time complexity
Õ(N1/3η8/3), provided the volume is proportional to η, and
spatial complexity O(ηlogN). Under the same assumptions,
second quantization gives time complexity Õ(N2(N/η)2/3) and
spatial complexity O(Nlog N). [Note: The notation Õ
suppresses logarithimic factors. For example, O(xlogx)i si n
this notation represented as Õ(x).]
Researchers have also considered extending the use of
quantum algorithms in exploring nontraditional regimes inquantum chemistry such as relativistic dynamics
330,331and
quantum dynamics beyond the BOA.88,89,332As reliable
quantum computers begin to come online, there will be a
continued demand for improvement of these quantumalgorithms.
We give a brief overview of simulation techniques used in
quantum chemistry with corresponding Hamiltonian simu-
lation algorithms in Figure 5 . A summary of query complexity
and T-counts for a majority of these algorithms can be found
in ref 298.
4.2.3. Measuring Properties of Many-Body Systems.
The last step of quantum chemistry algorithms is extractinginformation about the system from the wave function. Such
information includes the ground-state energy, scattering
amplitudes, electronic charge density or k-particle correla-
tions.
40In principle, it is possible to estimate any physical
quantity or observable that can be expressed through a low-
depth quantum circuit and single-qubit measurements.
The most sought-for information in these algorithms is the
ground-state energy. Zalka53sketched a method for preparing a
known quantum state and introduced the “von Neumann
trick ”for extracting properties from the prepared wave
function. Lidar and Wang43then applied these techniques to
develop an algorithm for determining the thermal rate constant
of a chemical reaction. Soon after, Abrams and Lloyd40further
developed these techniques to speci ﬁcally apply them toward
calculating static properties of a quantum system. In 2005,Aspuru-Guzik et al.
41adapted these techniques for the
electronic structure problem. This allowed the number of
qubits in the QPEA ancilla register to be reduced from 20 to 4,enabling the study of quantum algorithms for electronic
structure problems on a classical computer.41This work shows
that even with modest quantum computers of 30 −100 error-
corrected qubits, ground-state energy calculations of H 2O and
LiH could be carried out to an accuracy beyond that of
classical computers. The essential algorithm underlying thisapproach is quantum phase estimation and its modi ﬁcations (see
section 4.1.2 ).
An iterative version of QPEA for ground-state estimation
was recently introduced by Berry et al.296The authors assume
that there is an upper bound on the ground-state energy, sayfrom a classical variational method, that is guaranteed to belower than the energy of the ﬁrst excited state. Given this
assumption, one can perform QPEA gradually, measuring theancilla qubits sequentially instead of postponing the measure-ment to the end of the circuit. If the outcome of the QPEA islikely to be a state above this threshold, i.e., not the groundstate, it is possible to abort phase estimation and restart thealgorithm.
QPEA can be also used for estimating the energies of excited
states. In the simplest setting, one can use a state that is not an
energy eigenstate to sample multiple energies from the
spectrum of the Hamiltonian. Santagati et al.
336introduced a
more sophisticated technique for approximating excited-stateenergies.
A quantum algorithm for ground-state energy estimation (as
discussed here) requires techniques from state preparation(section 4.2.1 ) and, as a subroutine, simulation ( section 4.2.2 ).
Combining the recent developments in all of these areas,Babbush et al.
298gave detailed resource estimates, or “pricing ”,
for classically intractable ground-state energy calculations ofdiamond, graphite, silicon, metallic lithium, and crystallinelithium hydride. Incorporating state-of-the-art error correctionmethods, they showed that the estimates for the number ofgates (which is dominated by the number of T-gates) required
to estimate the ground-state energy of these systems is millionsof times smaller than the number needed in the methods usedearlier for FeMoCo.
197
Without access to fault-tolerant quantum computers, only
proof-of-principle quantum chemistry calculations have beendemonstrated. In particular, few-qubit simulations, oftenwithout error correction, have been carried out in mostmajor architectures used for quantum information. In 2010,Lanyon et al.
251demonstrated the use of the IPEA to measure
the energy of molecular wave functions. In this case, the wavefunction of molecular hydrogen (H
2) in a minimal basis set
was encoded in a one-qubit state and the IPEA was realizedusing a two-qubit photonic chip, calculating the molecularhydrogen spectrum to 20 bits of precision. A similar procedurewas applied to H
2using nuclear magnetic resonance Lanyon et
al.,251Du et al.,252and Dolde et al.253and to helium hydride
(HeH+) using nitrogen vacancies in diamond.253
Although these proof-of-principle experiments are ground-
breaking, it is not clear how to scale them because of their
reliance on Hamiltonians simpli ﬁcations and tomography. The
ﬁrst scalable demonstration of the IPEA (and the VQE
algorithm, as discussed in section 5 )e m p l o y e dt h r e e
superconducting qubits for simulating H 2in a minimal basis
and was carried out in 2016.64We will explain HQC
algorithms better suitable for these devices in the next section.
5. QUANTUM ALGORITHMS FOR NOISY
INTERMEDIATE-SCALE QUANTUM DEVICES
Despite recent improvements in the resource estimates for fully
quantum chemistry algorithms such as the QPEA, the numberof gates and circuit depth required for their implementationsurpass the capabilities of existing and near-term quantumdevices. Furthermore, these early devices, also called “pre-
threshold ”or NISQ
60devices, cannot support quantum errorChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510878


--- PAGE 24 ---
correction schemes, which require additional overhead. Such
limitations have motivated the development of quantumalgorithms that assume the use of an imperfect, noisy quantumcomputer that can still outperform classical algorithms atproviding approximate solutions to relevant problems.
An algorithm for a NISQ device requires a low circuit depth
that allows for execution within the limited coherence time ofthe device. Additionally, the quantity of interest should be easyto extract from direct measurements of the quantum statesprepared in the device. To make NISQ algorithms as e ﬃcient
as possible, one can allocate computational tasks betweenquantum and classical devices based on the inherentadvantages of each device. These observations led to the riseof HQC algorithms, which leverage strengths of quantum andclassical computation, utilizing each where appropriate.
The general layout of HQC algorithms, as illustrated in
Figure 6 , comprises three steps. The ﬁrst step is state
preparation, achieved by application of a sequence of
parametrized quantum gates on an initial state. The secondstep is measurement, in which the value of the objectivefunction is estimated from measurements performed on theprepared quantum state. The third step involves feedback oroptimization on the classical computer to determine newparameters to improve the quality of the state.
While the algorithms developed within this framework can
be implemented on fault-tolerant quantum computers, theiroriginal intent is to be implemented on NISQ devices. Oneparticular challenge of this implementation is the presence oferrors in the machine, which impacts the quality of theobservables measured on the device. While some HQCalgorithms have shown robustness against certain types oferrors, speci ﬁc techniques to mitigate noise on NISQ devices
have been proposed and started to be incorporated into theimplementations of HQC algorithms
337−339
In this section, we will discuss some of the HQC algorithms
developed for the simulation of quantum chemistry. See Figure
1for its connection with previous sections. Speci ﬁcally, section
5.1describes the VQE approach,61,340theﬁrst example of an
HQC algorithm to be proposed. VQE applies the time-
independent variational principle to optimize the parameters ofa quantum circuit implementing an ansatz on the quantumcomputer. This method provides approximate solutions to thetime-independent Schro ̈dinger equation. Section 4.2 describes
the variational quantum simulation (VQS) algorithm, which isanalogous to VQE for ﬁnding approximate solutions to thetime-dynamics of the Schro ̈dinger equation by applying one
formulation of the TDVP and other variations of thesealgorithms for the static problem. Finally, section 5.3 covers
algorithms for quantum chemistry simulation developed fornon-gate-based near-term quantum devices, which includesdevices for AQC and linear optics.
5.1. Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE) Algorithm
The VQE algorithm is an application of the time-independentvariational principle, where the wave function ansatzpreparation and energy estimation are both implemented ona quantum device. This paradigm allows for much ﬂexibility in
practice because the ansatz can be chosen to take into accountthe speci ﬁcations of the quantum hardware. Furthermore, the
energy estimation for VQE is performed by a technique calledHamiltonian averaging , described below, that exchanges
coherence time with the ability to sample the quantumcomputer multiple times. These two aspects make VQE a good
candidate to simulate the ground states of quantum systems
using current and near-term quantum devices. The core of thealgorithm can be broken down into the following steps:
1. State Preparation: A parametrized quantum state |Ψ(θ⃗)⟩
is prepared on the quantum device. This is achieved byapplying a parametrized unitary to an easy-to-prepare
initial state |Ψ
0⟩(e.g., a computational basis state):
U(θ⃗)|Ψ0⟩=|Ψ(θ⃗)⟩. The parametrized unitary is de ﬁned
by the choice of ansatz, which should correspond to afamily of states that cannot be e ﬃciently represented and
manipulated on a classical computer;
2. Energy Estimation: The expectation value of the energy
⟨H⟩(θ⃗) is estimated using a Hamiltonian averaging
procedure, which involves taking measurements oftensor products of Pauli terms corresponding to thequbit representation of the target Hamiltonian;
63
3. Classical Feedback: The parameters θ⃗of the quantum
state are updated using a classical nonlinear optimizationroutine;
4. Steps 2 and 3 are repeated until convergence criteria
(e.g., energy) are satis ﬁed.
The basic framework of VQE is modular in design such that
various types of extensions and improvements are possible. Inthe following subsections, we describe each VQE step ingreater detail, outlining improvements as well as openquestions pertaining to the particular step.
5.1.1. Ansatzes for State Preparation. Theﬂexibility of
the VQE algorithm arises from the ability to choose theparametrized trial state used to approximate the eigenstates ofthe target Hamiltonian. Consequently, the performance of thealgorithm depends largely on the quality and structure of thisansatz. In general, the construction of the ansatz involvespreparing an initial state and building upon it using aparametrized quantum circuit, as shown in Figure 7 .
Intuitively, a well-chosen ansatz can dramatically improve
the capabilities of the classical optimization in the VQEalgorithm. One aspect of this intuition was recently formalizedby McClean et al.
341The authors showed that, for su ﬃciently
random circuits, the variational parameter landscape is plagued
by the overabundance of “barren plateaus ”, large regions in
which the cost function gradient is nearly zero. This impliesthat using an arbitrary or unstructured ansatz will lead to poorconvergence of the optimization routine. This issue can becircumvented by using a physically motivated ansatz that hasmeasurable gradients to thus better guide the optimizer.
Figure 6. Outline of the hybrid quantum −classical (HQC)
framework. The ﬁrst part of the algorithm is performed as a quantum
circuit on quantum hardware going from an input state to an output
state. After measurement the data is passed on to a classical computer
where the parameter optimization of the quantum circuit happens.
This process allows one to take advantage of the strengths of present-
day hardware and to avoid some of the weaknesses.Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510879


--- PAGE 25 ---
Another important quality of a circuit ansatz, particularly
important for NISQ devices, is the ability to implement it witha high- ﬁdelity, low-depth circuit.
The two broad strategies in circuit ansatz design account for
these considerations to di ﬀerent extents:
1.physically motivated ansatz (PMA), methods based on or
inspired by numerical techniques that systematicallyapproximate the exact electronic wave function;
2.hardware heuristic ansatz (HHA), methods that corre-
spond to parametrized circuits comprising single-qubitrotations and entangling blocks generally chosen to takeadvantage of speci ﬁc quantum hardware capabilities.
The prototypical example of the PMA category is the unitary
coupled cluster (UCC) ansatz, which consists of a systematicexpansion that approximates the exact many-electron wavefunction as the excitation rank of the operators in the clusteroperator increases. While the UCC ansatz is intractable to
express with a classical computer,
342−344a Trotter −Suzuki
decomposition approximation (cf. section 2.3 ) of this trans-
formation can be implemented e ﬃciently on a quantum
computer.61,340The relatively large number of parameters and
long circuit depth required to implement UCC motivated thedevelopment of alternative approaches. In particular, Wecker etal. proposed a Hamiltonian variational ansatz approach,
62which consists of a parametrized version of the circuit
implementing Hamiltonian simulation for the target Hamil-
tonian. This approach allows for a reduction in the number of
variational parameters, however, the depth of the circuit
depends on the complexity of the target Hamiltonian. When
combined with the simpli ﬁed representations of the Hamil-
tonian described in the previous section,323the Hamiltonian
variational method can be used to construct variational circuits
with depth equal to the number of spin-orbitals for a linear
qubit architecture, using the fermionic swap network.324
Independently, Dallaire-Demers et al.345proposed a related
PMA ansatz with the same scaling in depth based on a circuit
employed to prepare fermionic Gaussian states (FGSs) on a
quantum register, called the low-depth circuit ansatz (LDCA).
The LDCA ansatz comprises parallel layers of nearest-neighbor
matchgates augmented by ZZinteractions.
On the other hand, HHA approaches have been mainly
motivated by limitations of existing quantum hardware. The
general structure of the quantum circuits employed as HHA
comprises two interleaved blocks: the ﬁrst one comprising
single-qubit rotations and the second one composed of ﬁxed
entangling operations that can be easily executed when taking
into account particular constraints of the quantum hardware
employed.67This concept was applied in the experimental
demonstration of the VQE protocol for small molecules,67and
Figure 7. Illustration of the VQE algorithm. Traditionally, the quantum computer is used to prepare a set of parametrized quantum states followed
by applications of rotations Ri∈{I,RX(−π/2), RY(π/2)} depending on the Pauli term of the Hamiltonian to be measured. The classical computer
then takes the individual estimates of the Pauli term expectation values ⟨Pi(θ⃗)⟩and averages them to compute a single value E̅(θ⃗). This cost
function value is fed into an optimization routine, which produces an updated set of parameters θ⃗as input for the quantum circuit in the next
optimization loop. This procedure is repeated until the energy converges. We note that recent and future e ﬀorts are to improve each VQE
component as well as replace certain “classical ”subroutines with quantum counterparts to further leverage the capabilities of quantum computers.Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510880


--- PAGE 26 ---
it has been recently re ﬁned using sets of gates that conserve
particle number.346Although these approaches can be
implemented more easily than existing PMA on NISQ devices,to date, there lacks theoretical evidence one way or the otherregarding their ability to e ﬃciently approximate many-electron
wave functions.
Evidently, signi ﬁcant progress has been made in the
development and design of ansatzes. However, the existenceof a general formulation to construct meaningful ansatzes forparticular target Hamiltonians remains an open question. Inwhat follows we describe in more detail some of the ansatzesoutlined above.
Unitary Coupled Cluster (UCC). Traditional coupled-cluster
(CC) methods have long been considered the “gold standard ”
of quantum chemistry because they o ﬀer chemically accurate
results for a variety of systems, including molecules near
equilibrium, and because they are tractable on classicalcomputers.
Recall that the ansatz for the traditional coupled-cluster
method can be written as
|Ψ⟩ = | Φ⟩ eT
CC 0 (31)
where |Φ0⟩is a reference state, usually the solution to the HF
equations, and Tcorresponds to excitation operators of
diﬀerent excitation rank de ﬁned in terms of fermionic
annihilation and creation operators as
∑=η
=TT
ii
1 (32)
∑=
∈
∈†T taa
i
aai
ai 1
occ
virt (33)
∑=
>∈
>∈††T ta a a a ,. . .
ij
ababij
abij 2
occ
virt (34)
where the occ and virt spaces are de ﬁned as the occupied and
unoccupied sites in the reference state and ηis the number of
electrons in the system. For practical implementations onclassical computers, Tis usually truncated to lower excitation
ranks, e.g., single ( T
1) and double ( T2) excitations. This allows
one to ﬁnd optimal CC amplitudes by projecting the
Schrödinger equation in the form
|Φ⟩= |Φ ⟩−HEeeTT
0C C 0 (35)
against a set of con ﬁgurations { ⟨μ|}. This set spans the space of
all the states that can be reached by applying the truncatedcluster operator Tlinearly to the reference state. The
similarity-transformed Hamiltonian, e
−THeT, can be expanded
using the Baker −Campbell −Hausdor ﬀ(BCH) formula. The
expansion applied to eq 35 has a ﬁnite truncation leading to a
ﬁnite set of nonlinear equations for the CC energy and
amplitudes. These equations are then solved using standardnumerical methods such as Newton ’s approach.92A method
such as CCSD(T) (where the e ﬀect of triple excitations is
included using perturbation theory) su ﬃces to achieve
chemical accuracy for energies of molecules near equilibrium.Unfortunately the scaling of this approach, O(N
7), limits its
applicability to small molecules.
Unitary coupled-cluster (UCC) is an alternative CC
formulation, constructed as|Ψ⟩ = | Φ ⟩−†eTT
UCC 0 (36)
where the Toperator is replaced by the anti-Hermitian
operator T−T†. Consequently, the corresponding CC
operator is unitary and the formulation is variational, which
oﬀers an advantage compared to standard CC. However, UCC
is not a practical ansatz in classical quantum chemistry becausethe BCH expansion of the similarity transformed Hamiltonian,
e
−(T−T†)HeT−T†, does not terminate.344Fortunately, unitary
operations such as eT−T†are natural operations on quantum
computers. They can be readily implemented by mapping
fermionic excitation operators to qubit operators and applying
the Trotter −Suzuki decomposition to the cluster operator.
The di ﬀerent Trotter approximations to the UCC operator
constitute a family of CC-inspired ansatz that can beimplemented on a quantum computer using standard circuit
compilation techniques for exponentiating Pauli matrices.1
Given the inherent advantage in implementing the ansatz aswell as the high accuracies of CC methods, the application of
the UCC ansatz truncated up to single and double excitations(UCCSD) has been investigated both theoretically and
experimentally.
61,62,69,70,72,345−348
In the case of a Trotterized implementation of UCCSD, the
ansatz parameters correspond to the cluster amplitudes, whose
number scales as O(N2η2)<O(N4). Correspondingly, a serial
implementation of these terms would result in a scaling of the
number of gates of O(fN4), where findicates the number of
gates required for implementing each term. The scaling of f
with Ndepends on the fermion-to-qubit mapping employed:
i nt h ec a s eo ft h eB r a v y i −Kitaev transformation f∈
O(log( N)), while in the case of Jordan −Wigner f∈O(N)
(see Appendix B ). Similarly, the circuit depth can be upper-
bounded to O(fN4), which corresponds to a serial execution;
however, this can be improved depending on the connectivity
constraints of the hardware and the ability to parallelize
operations in the quantum registers. For architectures with
arbitrary connectivity that allow parallelization, some strategiesdeveloped for Trotterized Hamiltonian evolution58could save
up to a linear factor in depth using a constant number of ancilla
qubits when a Jordan −Wigner mapping is used.
The scaling in the number of parameters of the UCCSD
ansatz poses a challenge for typical optimization strategies, as
the number of amplitudes can easily increase to the order of
thousands for systems with tens of spin-orbitals and half- ﬁlling.
To reduce this cost, practical applications of UCCSD must
consider typical strategies employed in classical quantum
chemistry to prioritize those excitation operators that are more
relevant for achieving accuracy. Some of these strategies
include limiting the calculation to active spaces, freezing coreorbitals, applying spin-symmetry constraints, and discarding
operators with low amplitudes based on classical e ﬃcient
approximations, e.g., Møller −Plesset perturbation
theory.63,346,348The last strategy also has the potential to
signiﬁcantly reduce the number of gates required and provides
approximate amplitudes for initializing the optimization, which
has been pointed out as critical for improving convergence.348
Most numerical demonstrations of UCCSD applied to VQE
have explored the impact of di ﬀerent optimization approaches,
including both gradient-free and gradient-based methods, as
described in more detail in section 5.1.3 . In practice, gradient-
based methods can be implemented using either numerical oranalytical gradients. It has been pointed out that analyticalChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510881


--- PAGE 27 ---
gradients require orders-of-magnitude fewer measurements
than numerical gradients.348The e ﬀect of the number of
Trotter steps has been also investigated, indicating that theaccuracy of the exact impl ementation of the UCCSD
exponential operator is virtually the same as that obtainedwith Trotterized UCCSD for di ﬀerent Trotter numbers. This
can be understood considering that di ﬀerent Trotterized
versions of UCCSD correspond to di ﬀerent ansatzes and the
variational optimization tends to compensate the di ﬀerences
between the non-Trotterized and the Trotterized version,which would have di ﬀerent optimal amplitudes. UCCSD has
been implemented in combination with di ﬀerent basis set
representations of the chemistry Hamiltonian, including theparticle/hole basis
346and the Bogoliubov basis.345The latter
allows for the application of UCC to Hamiltonians with pairing
ﬁelds, extending the range of applicability of VQE to problems
in condensed matter and nuclear physics. Finally, UCCSD hasbeen demonstrated experimentally for HeH
+using a single
trapped ion,70for H 2on a superconducting quantum
computer,64for H 2and LiH on an ion-trapped quantum
computer72and for the wave function of a deuterium nucleus
using cloud quantum computing.69
Hamiltonian Variational Ansatz. The Hamiltonian varia-
tional approach, proposed by Wecker et al.,56deﬁnes a strategy
for building variational ansatzes for arbitrary Hamiltonians.The general idea is described as follows: consider a targetHamiltonian that can be written as a sum of local terms, H=
∑
ihiOi, where hiis a scalar and Oiis a local operator.
Furthermore, the terms in this Hamiltonian can be groupedinto arbitrary subsets, H=∑
jHj. The criteria for grouping can
diﬀer depending on the target Hamiltonian, as shown below.
The variational ansatz is de ﬁned as
∏ θθ θ|Ψ⟩ = [ ] | Ψ ⟩
=UU ( ) ( )... ( )
bS
Hjb
Hb
110j 1i
kjjjjjjy
{zzzzzz
(37)
where |Ψ0⟩can be chosen to match the desired symmetry
properties of the target ground state, UHk(θkb) = exp( θkbHj),θis
a vector grouping the scalar variational parameters to be
minimized [ θ11, ...,θkb, ...,θjS], and Sis the number of repetitions
of the circuit block and can be varied to control theapproximation accuracy. Notice that in the implementation,
each term U
Hk(θkb) has to be further broken down into a
product of exponentials of individuals terms since Hjmay be a
sum of terms. If all the terms within a subset were to commute,this could be implemented exactly. The de ﬁnition of the circuit
in the product of eq 37 resembles a ﬁrst-order Trotterized
evolution under the Hamiltonian, where now the terms havebeen multiplied by arbitrary parameters. Other versions of eq
37can be obtained by mimicking higher-order Trotter −Suzuki
formulas.
The Hamiltonian variational approach is inspired by both
ASP and the quantum approximate optimization algorithm(QAOA).
349,350In ASP, the ground state of a target
Hamiltonian, H1, is obtained by adiabatically evolving the
ground state of a Hamiltonian H0,|Ψ0⟩, that is easy to prepare.
This process assumes that the transition between H0andH1is
continuous and that the ground-state energy of λH0+( 1−λ)
H1remains su ﬃciently separated from the ﬁrst-excited-state
energy during the preparation (see section 5.3.1 for discussion
of the importance of the “energy gap ”remaining large). In
practice, ASP is implemented by rotating the initial state by atime-dependent Hamiltonian of the form H(t)= A(t)H0+
B(t)H1, where A(t) and B(t) are continuous functions de ﬁning
the relative weights between the initial Hamiltonian and the
target one, which constitutes the annealing schedule. This
evolution is performed during some annealing time tand is
discretized into Ssteps of sizeΔ=tt
S, such that the annealing
becomes a sequence of Sunitary rotations by Hamiltonians
interpolating between H0and H1. If the initial and target
Hamiltonian are both expressed as a sum over the sameHamiltonian terms, H
i=∑jhjiOj, then the evolution in eq 37
can be seen as analogous to a discretized ASP, where the angles
of the rotations are obtained by a variational optimizationinstead of being ﬁxed by a prede ﬁned annealing schedule. A
related idea is the concept of adiabatically parametrized states,
introduced by McClean et al.,63where the functions de ﬁning
the annealing schedule are parametrized and subsequently
optimized using variational minimization.
Wecker et al.62also proposed two di ﬀerent optimization
strategies for minimizing the energy of the ansatz de ﬁned in eq
37.T h e ﬁrst approach, described as global variational ,
corresponds to the simultaneous optimization of all the
parameters in the ansatz, given a ﬁxed value of S. The second
approach, called annealed variational , is also inspired by
discretized ASP. It consists of performing a block-by-blockoptimization that starts by optimizing the ansatz with S=1 .
The state resulting from this optimization, |Ψ
(1)⟩, is used as the
initial state for an optimization with another variational circuit
with S= 1, obtaining a new state, |Ψ(2)⟩. This process is
repeated until Ssteps have been completed. The ﬁnal
parameters could be further re ﬁned by a global optimization,
or at each step kin the sequential optimization a global
optimization could be applied. The block-by-block optimiza-tion procedure improves convergence and is analogous to the
segment-by-segment pre-training strategy employed in ma-
chine learning to avoid barren plateaus in the optimization of
neural networks.351,352
The performance of the Hamiltonian variational approach
applied to the Fermi −Hubbard model in a 2D lattice and the
electronic structure Hamiltonian is analyzed in ref 62. In the
ﬁrst case, the target Hamiltonian has the form
∑∑=− +
σσσ
⟨⟩†
↑†
↑↓†
↓ H t aa U aaaa
ijij
iiiii
,,,, ,,,,
(38)
where ai,σ†andai,σrespectively create and annihilate an electron
at site iwith spin σ∈{↑,↓}. The summation in the ﬁrst term
runs over nearest neighbors, denoted as ⟨i,j⟩. In this case, the
Hubbard Hamiltonian is divided as H=hh+hv+hU, where hh
and hvare the sums of hopping terms in the horizontal and
vertical directions, respectively, and hUis the repulsion term.
The authors use a second-order Trotter formula for the
Hamiltonian variational ansatz,
∏ θσθθθ|Ψ⟩ = − | Ψ ⟩
=†UU U U ()2()()2bS
UUb
hhb
vvb
UUb
10Ä
ÇÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅi
kjjjjjy
{zzzzzi
kjjjjjy
{zzzzzÉ
ÖÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑ
(39)
where UX(θX) denotes a Trotter approximation to exp( iθXhX)
where X∈{U,h,v}. The initial state |Ψ0⟩is chosen to be in
the correct spin sector, e.g., a computational state with equal
number of spin-up and spin-down qubits for singlet groundstates.Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510882


--- PAGE 28 ---
For the application to the electronic structure Hamiltonian,
the terms are separated into three groups corresponding to
diagonal terms, hopping terms, and exchange terms as follows:
∑∑ ∑ ε=+†† †H aa h aaaa
ppppp
pqpqqp p p q q diag
, (40)
∑∑=+†† †H ha a h a a a a
pqpq p q
pqrprrq p q r r hop
,, , (41)
∑=††H ha a a a
pqrspqrs p q s r ex
,,, (42)
where the sums are taken with p,q,r,sall distinct from one
another. In this case the ansatz is built as
∏ θσ θ
θ
θ θ|Ψ ⟩= − − ×
|Ψ⟩=††UU U
UU()22()
22bS b b
b
b b1exex
hophop
diag diag
hophop
exex
0Ä
ÇÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅi
kjjjjjy
{zzzzzi
kjjjjjjjy
{zzzzzzz
i
kjjjjjjjy
{zzzzzzzi
kjjjjjy
{zzzzzÉ
ÖÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑ
(43)
where UX(θX) denotes a Trotter approximation to exp( iθXhX),
where X∈{ex, hop, diag }. The initial state is chosen to be the
ground state of Hdiag, and the basis is a HF basis such that
Hhop|Ψ0⟩= 0. Both eqs 39 and40were numerically tested on
lattices of size 2 ×N, with N= 4, 6, 8, 10, or 12, and for small
molecules such as HeH+,H2O, BeH 2, and hydrogen chains (H x
with x∈{6, 8, 10}). The results show that this strategy can
achieve good overlaps with the ground state for values of S
varying between 3 and 20 (see Wecker et al.62). However, it
remains to be investigated how Swould scale with the size of
the system and the accuracy required for generic Hamiltonians.
The Hamiltonian variational approach greatly reduces the
number of variational parameters, which eases the optimiza-
tion. In the case of the Hubbard model, it also provides an
ansatz that scales only linearly with the size of the system and
therefore is a good candidate for experimental demonstration
in near-term devices. However, in the case of quantum
chemistry Hamiltonians, the depth of the corresponding ansatz
is directly related to the number of terms in the Hamiltonian,which scales formally as O(N
4). This scaling might vary
depending on the analytical properties of the basis sets
employed to represent the Hamiltonian. In the case of
Gaussian-type orbitals (GTOs), which are the most popular
basis sets in quantum chemistry, the number of non-negligible
terms scales nearly quadratically for systems of su ﬃcient size,
as explained in more detail in section 5.1.2 . The sizes at which
this scaling is observed, however, depends on the nature of the
system and the basis set and might correspond to tens to
hundreds of angstroms.92,327This fact has motivated the
exploration of alternative basis sets that can show morefavorable scalings and therefore facilitate the computation.
In particular, Babbush et al. have proposed to use a dual
form of the plane wave basis
323which diagonalizes the
potential operator, leading to the following representation of
the electronic structure Hamiltonian that has only O(N2)
terms:∑
∑
∑
∑∑ ∑π ζ
π=[ ]
−Ω[− ]
+Ω[]
=+ +νσνν σ σ
σν
νσ
σ
νν
νσσ′′′− ′ ′†
′
′
≠′
′
′′ ≠′′
≠′− ′
′′′
†
≠HNkk r a a
kR r
kn
kr
knn
Ta a U n Vn n1
2cos
4 cos (
2 cospqqp p q
p
jvjj p
p
pq qpq
pq
pqpq p q
ppp
pqpq p q,,,2
,,
,
02 ,
(,)(,)
02 ,,
(44)
where npis the number operator, ζjare nuclei charges, and kνis
a vector of the plane wave frequencies at the harmonics of thecomputational cell in three dimensions, with volume Ω. Here,
σis the spin degree of freedom and νis a three-dimensional
vector of integers with elements in [ −N
1/3,N1/3]. Letter
indices with a prime symbol denote orbitals, while regularletters indicate spin-orbitals. The plane wave dual basis set canbe viewed as a discrete variable representation and isparticularly suited for periodic systems. When mapped toqubit operators, the Hamiltonian in eq 44 is equivalent to the
following local Hamiltonian in the Jordan −Wigner representa-
tion:
∑∑ ∑
∑=+
++
++≠
≠+− +−HTU V
ZV Z Z
T
X Z ZX Y Z ZY22
2( ... ... )ppp p
qpq
p
pqpq p q
pqpq
pp q q pp q q 11 11i
kjjjjjjjy
{zzzzzzz
(45)
Notice that this Hamiltonian also encompasses the Fermi −
Hubbard Hamiltonian and can be readily combined with theHamiltonian variational strategy to produce a variationalansatz. In Babbush et al.,
323this idea is developed to propose
a VQE simulation for Jellium, that requires depth O(NS) and
optimizes only over O(N) parameters by exploiting the
translational invariance of this system.
Finally, Kivlichan et al.324demonstrated that a single Trotter
step of the Hamiltonian in eq 44 can be implemented with a
circuit of depth Nusing a fermionic swap network , which has a
constant improvement with respect to the proposal in Babbushet al.323and is conjectured to be optimal. In the particular case
of the Fermi −Hubbard Hamiltonian, the scaling is further
reduced to ON() . The main insight of this proposal is that
when the Jordan −Wigner transformation acts on the terms
(ap†aq+aq†ap), it produces terms of locality |p−q|+ 1, which
has signi ﬁcant overhead when mapped to a circuit. To get rid
of this problem, the authors propose to execute the Trotterstep by executing operations only on nearest neighbor qubits,and then swapping the spin-orbital indexes, until all the N(N−
1)/2 interactions between spin-orbitals are implemented. Theswapping is performed using the fermionic-SWAP (f-SWAP)gate, de ﬁned as
=+ + − −††††f aa aa aa aa1pq
pq q p pq q p SWAP,(46)
Furthermore, rotations by the interaction and repulsion terms
between orbitals with indexes pandqcould be implemented
together with the f-SWAP gates, forming the so-called fermionic
simulation gate ,Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510883


--- PAGE 29 ---
=− − +
≡− − − −
×− +
×+ + +††Fp q i Vn n t i T aa aa tf
iVZ Z Z Z t
iTX X Y Y t
XX YY Z Z(, ) e x p ( ) e x p ( ( ) )
exp4(1 )
exp2()
1
2()pq p q pq p q q ppq
pq p q p q
pq p q p q
pq p q p qswap,
i
kjjjy
{zzz
i
kjjjy
{zzz
(47)
≡−
−
−−iT t T t
Tt i Tt10 0 0
0s i n ( ) c o s ( ) 0
0c o s ( ) s i n ( ) 0
00 0 epq pq
pq pq
iV tpqÄ
ÇÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÉ
ÖÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑ
(48)
The fermionic swap network circuit could be readily employed
in combination with the Hamiltonian variational strategy tocreate a variational ansatz for preparing ground states of theHamiltonian of eq 44 using VQE. For example, one could
adopt a parametrization with distinct variables for theinteraction and the hopping terms, in analogy with eq 39
Alternatively, one could free the TandVterms as variational
parameters, which scales as O(N
2) compared to O(N4) of the
UCCSD ansatz.
Low Depth Circuit Ansatz (LDCA). Another ansatz for state
preparation in VQE is the so-called LDCA proposed byDallaire-Demers et al.345This ansatz is inspired by a circuit for
preparing fermionic Gaussian states (FGSs) on quantumcomputers. In what follows, we brie ﬂy describe FGSs and some
of the techniques for preparing these states in quantumregisters before describing the LDCA.
FGSs are states of which the density operators can be
expressed as an exponential of a quadratic function offermionic creation and annihilation operators. Typical singledeterminant ansatzes, such as the Hartree −Fock (HF) and the
Bardeen −Cooper −Schrei ﬀer (BCS) states for superconductiv-
ity, are FGSs. The advantage of simulating this family of statesis that they are completely characterized by a quadratic numberof parameters and therefore, can be manipulated e ﬃciently on
a classical computer. A particularly convenient representationof an FGS is via its covariance matrix ( Γ), which corresponds
to a 2 N×2Nmatrix:
ργ γΓ= [ ]i
2tr( , )kl kl (49)
where γj=aj†+ajandγj†=−i(aj†−aj) correspond to Majorana
operators and ρis the corresponding FGSs. For pure states, iΓ
−1≤0 andΓ2=−1. Importantly, any expectation value of an
operator can be computed from the covariance matrix as
ργ γ=Γ | itr( ... ) Pf( )p
jj jj...p p 12 12 (50)
where 1 ≤j1< ... < j2p≤2N,Γ|j1...j2pis the corresponding
submatrix of Γ, and
∑∏ Γ=
!Γ= Γ
∈ =−Ns Pf( )1
2sgn( ) det( )N
sS jN
sj sj
1(2 1), (2 )
N2
(51)
is the Pfa ﬃan of a 2 N×2Nmatrix de ﬁned from the symmetric
group S2Nand sgn( s) is the signature of the permutation s.
Similarly, the time evolution of a state can also be described viathe covariance matrix. FGSs have special properties, including
being ground states of quadratic Hamiltonians of the form H=
∑pqhpqγpγq. In addition, pure FGSs can be brought into the
form |ψ⟩=∏k=12N(uk+vkak†ak†)|0⟩, where |vk|2+|uk|2= 1, using
an appropriate basis set transformation. Finally, we point outthat FGSs also include thermal states of quadratic fermionicHamiltonians, and in the case where the number of particles iswell-de ﬁned, FGSs correspond to Slater determinants.
Preparing FGSs on a quantum computer is often the ﬁrst
step in the quantum simulation of fermionic Hamiltonians,whether QPE or variational schemes such as VQE areemployed. Methods for preparing Slater determinants andgeneral FGSs employ a quadratic number of gates.
324,345,353,354
In the case of Slater determinants, the preparation is often
described in terms of a rotation <applied to a single
determinant,
ψ|⟩= | ⟩††cc... vacs N 1< (52)
where ck†and ckrepresent fermionic operators in an easy-to-
prepare basis (e.g., the computational basis). The trans-
formation <is a 2N×2Nmatrix; however, it is equivalent to
rotating the basis,
∑∑∑ ϕψ== *=†† †ua c ua c u;;p
qqpq p
qqp q p
qqp q
(53)
where ϕp,ap†, and apare spin-orbitals and fermionic operators
in the rotated basis and uis an N×Nunitary matrix. The
operator<is related to uvia
∑=−††ua a a a exp ( )
pqpq p q p q <i
kjjjjjjjy
{zzzzzzz
(54)
<can be decomposed into a sequence of Givens rotations by
applying a QR decomposition scheme to u, generating a circuit
composed of two-qubit gates corresponding to these Givensrotations applied on neighboring qubits.324,353
In the case of FGSs, there exist two related schemes. Jiang et
al.353proposed a method that speci ﬁes the FGSs as the
corresponding quadratic fermionic Hamiltonian for which thetarget FGSs are ground states. The Hamiltonian is
∑∑=Σ+ Δ+
=†
=††H cc cc1
2( h.c.)
jkN
jk j k
jkN
jk j k
,1 ,1 (55)
where Σ=Σ†andΔ=−Δ†are complex matrices. This
Hamiltonian is brought into its diagonal form using standardmethods, yielding
∑=ϵ+†H bb C
jjj j
(56)
where Cis a constant and bjand bj†are new fermionic
operators. The transformation that maps the original fermionicoperators to the new ones is described by the 2 N×2Nmatrix
W,d eﬁned by
=††
Wb
bc
cÄ
ÇÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÉ
ÖÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÄ
ÇÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅ
É
ÖÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑ
(57)
Using matrix manipulation on W, the corresponding circuit
implementing this transformation, >, can be decomposed
into a sequence of ( N−1)N/2 Givens rotations applied on
neighboring qubits and Nparticle −hole transformationsChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510884


--- PAGE 30 ---
implemented as single-qubit rotations. This circuit can be
parallelized in depth O(N).353
Independently, Dallaire-Demers et al.345proposed a method
that prepares FGSs speci ﬁed by their corresponding covariance
matrix. The prepared state has the form
∏|Φ⟩= | ⟩
=Cb vac
kM
k 0
1 (58)
where |vac⟩is the Fock vacuum, the operators bkand their
Hermitian conjugates, bk†, correspond to Bogoliubov operators
which are de ﬁned as in eq 57 , and ck†andckare the original
fermionic operators with respect to the Fock vacuum. From
the covariance matrix it is possible to obtain the corresponding
Wmatrix, which is later decomposed into 2 N(N−1)
matchgates acting on neighboring qubits and Nlocal rotations,
using the Ho ﬀmann algorithm.355Theﬁnal circuit can be
parallelized such that its depth scales only as O(N). Notice that
both methods345,353achieve the same scaling but di ﬀer in the
types of gates and the numerical methods employed to
compute the angles of the preparation circuits. While the other
linear-depth methods have better constant factors, their circuits
are less general.324,345,353
The circuit requires a single layer of single-qubit rotations
followed by blocks of neighboring matchgates, Gij(k), acting on
qubits iand j. The matchgates can be decomposed into a
product of two-qubit evolutions under XX,XY,YX, and YY,
with the evolution times obtainable from the covariance
matrix. Each parallel cycle of the LDCA circuit interleaves
gates between even and odd neighboring qubits:
∏∏=
∈+
∈+ U GGk
iiik
iiik
MG()
odd,1()
even,1()
(59)
There areN
2Ä
ÅÅÅÅÅÅÉ
ÑÑÑÑÑÑcycles in total, i.e.,
∏=
=⌈⌉
U U
kM
k
MGNN
1/2
MG()
(60)
such that the transformation Wcan be composed as
∏=
=WU R
iM
iZ
MGNN
1 (61)
Dallaire-Demers et al.345suggested that a similar circuit
template could be used to create a variational ansatz by
complementing the list of matchgates with neighboring ZZ
interactions, allowing for the preparation of non-Gaussian
fermionic states. A similar idea has been used to design
ansatzes for preparing non-Gaussian states e ﬃciently on
classical computers, with high success.356The so-called low
depth circuit ansatz (LDCA), acts on the quasiparticle vacuum
state for the Bogoliubov picture, such that the initial statescorrespond to the generalized HF optimal state for the VQE
target Hamiltonian. The circuit comprises Lcycles of
variational blocks composed of the simulation gates K
ij,
where each Kijis a product of evolutions under YX,XY,ZZ,
YY, and XXwith the evolution times again given by the
covariance matrix.
Each layer kapplies variational rotations in parallel, ﬁrst on
the even pairs and then on the odd pairs, such that∏∏Θ=Θ Θ
∈++
∈++ U KK ( ) () ()kl kl
iiikl
iikl
iiikl
iikl
VarMG(, ) (, )
odd,1(, )
,1(, )
even,1(, )
,1(, )
(62)
A cycle lis composed ofN
2Ä
ÅÅÅÅÅÅÉ
ÑÑÑÑÑÑlayers, in analogy with the FGSs
preparation:
∏Θ=Θ
=⌈⌉
U U () ( )ll
kN
kl kl
VarMGNN( ) ( )
1/2
VarMG(, ) (, )
(63)
Finally, the Lcycles are assembled sequentially to form the
complete variational ansatz,
∏∏ θ Θ=Θ
==U UR () ( ) ( )
lL
ll
iM
iZ
iZ
VarMG
1VarMGNN( ) ( )
1 (64)
with only one round of variational phase rotations,
θ=θσR() eiZ
iZiiZ
zi
(65)
The variational state therefore has the form
∏ |ΨΘ⟩= Θ |⟩†
=⊗UU X () () 0
iN
iM
Bog VarMG
1 (66)
where UBogis the>transformation corresponding to the
optimal Bogoliubov transformation for the VQE targetHamiltonian, which can be included if measuring theHamiltonian is more e ﬃcient in the original basis. There are
ﬁve variational angles per K
ij(k,l)andN−1 of those terms per
layer. Since each cycle hasN
2Ä
ÅÅÅÅÅÅÉ
ÑÑÑÑÑÑlayers, an L-cycle circuit has
− LN5( 1 )N
2Ä
ÅÅÅÅÅÅÉ
ÑÑÑÑÑÑ
+Nvariational angles, the extra term arising
from the round of Zrotations. Considering parallelization, the
ﬁnal circuit depth is +L(10 8)N
2Ä
ÅÅÅÅÅÅÉ
ÑÑÑÑÑÑ+ 4 when we account for
UBog†and the initial round of single-qubit Xgates.
The linear scaling of the depth of LDCA makes it a viable
option for implementation on near-term NISQ devices. Thesame global variational and annealed variational optimizationapproaches employed in the optimization of Hamiltonianvariational approaches can be applied in this case. The LDCAalso has the advantage of being able to treat systems where thenumber of particles is not conserved, such as superconductors,and therefore expands the range of applications of VQE toproblems in condensed matter physics. For the same reason,the optimization of the energy must be performed byconstraining the number of particles in those cases where thenumber of particles is conserved, e.g., in molecular systems.Numerical studies of LDCA have shown great promise. In theoriginal paper,
345the authors applied LDCA to a system with
eight qubits, corresponding to a 2 ×2 Fermi −Hubbard lattice
and an extended Fermi −Hubbard model describing the
isomerization of cyclobutadiene. The results demonstratedthe ability of LDCA to describe the ground states of thesesystems in both weakly correlated and strongly correlatedregimes. More recently, the LDCA has been applied to lithiumhydride,
357showing superior accuracy compared to hardware
eﬃcient ansatz. Still, further numerical benchmarks and
theoretical analysis are required to better understand thescaling of the number of layers with the accuracy of the ansatz.
Finally, we point out that approaches analogous to LDCA
could be developed by interleaving the blocks of Givensrotations obtained in the procedure proposed by Jiang et al.,
353Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510885


--- PAGE 31 ---
with ZZinteractions and optimizing the parameters in the
Givens rotations variationally. In the same vein we note some
similarities between the LDCA circuit and the fermionic swapnetwork circuit proposed in the context of Hamiltonian
evolution for eq 44 . The circuits for the fermionic swap
network comprise fermionic swap gates applied on neighboringqubits that implement evolution under ZZ,Z,XXandYY. This
is very similar to the construction of the LDCA circuit with the
diﬀerence that LDCA also implements XYandYXinteractions,
which do not conserve the number of particles. This suggests
that the fermionic swap network circuit could be employed as a
template for variational ansatz with potentially similar results asthose observed for LDCA.
Hardware E ﬃcient Ansatz (HEA). This is a speci ﬁc instance
of the HHA class mentioned previously. These ansatzes
comprise a series of parametrized quantum circuits originallymotivated by the limitations of existing NISQ hardware.
67The
general construction of these circuits comprises Lentangling
blocks, each block containing parametrized gates chosen tofacilitate implementation according to the limitations in ﬁdelity
and connectivity of the hardware employed for the simulation.
In general, these circuits can be expressed as
θθ θ θ|Ψ⟩ = | Ψ ⟩ UU U ( ) ( )... ( ) ( )LL( ) (1) 1 (0) 0
0 (67)where the variational parameters correspond to θ=[θ0, ...,
θL−1,θL],U(k)denotes the kth entangling block, and |Ψ0⟩is a
suitable initial state. In the ﬁrst example of this ansatz,67each
entangling block comprised a single layer of parametrizedsingle-qubit rotations followed by a ﬁxed set of entangling two-
qubit gates, specially chosen for a six-qubit quantum processor
employed in the experiment. The circuit has the following
form:
∏ θθ θ θ= U RRR E () ( ) ( ) ( )kk
iN
iZ
ik
iX
ik
iZ
ik ()
,1 ,2 ,3 enti
kjjjjjjy
{zzzzzz
(68)
where Eentdenotes a ﬁxed set of two-qubit gates. In this case,
the total number of parameters scales as 3 N(L+2). For the
experiment, the qubit register was initialized with the |0⟩⊗N
state.
More recently, Barkoutsos et al.346proposed a new set of
entangling blocks. Two of these new blocks are designed to
implement number-conserving operators, more suitable forsimulations of molecular systems, and can be implementednatively on superconducting processor with transmonqubits.
358−360The third type of entangling block introduced
by Barkoutsos et al.346is similar to the original proposal ( eq
68), with Eentbeing a circuit with all-to-all CNOT gates and
with single-qubit rotations corresponding to Rz. For these new
Figure 8. (a) Illustration of the quantum autoencoder (QAE) algorithm. After the training set of quantum states is prepared, a variational circuit
comprised of encoding and decoding components is trained using measurements from either the trash state or the ﬁnal decoded state. Once
successfully trained, the encoding circuit of the overall QAE circuit can compress a set of n-qubit states to m-qubit states, where m≤n. (b) A
classical 4-2-4 autoencoder.Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510886


--- PAGE 32 ---
ansatzes, the HF state was employed as initial state in the VQE
calculation.
Ad iﬀerent approach that stays close to the hardware was
proposed by Ryabinkin et al.361The qubit coupled-cluster
method (QCC) implements a coupled-cluster ansatz in thequbit space without reference to fermionic wave functions.This allows for a very cost-e ﬀective implementation that results
in accurate energies after variational optimization. The methodwas later augmented
362with Lagrangian multipliers and
postprocessing procedures to account for the lack of correctsymmetries in the wave functions.
The accuracy of HEA have been tested both experimen-
tally67,362and numerically346,361for small molecular systems
including H 2, LiH, BeH 2and H 2O. These implementations
have incorporated the use of active spaces and methodologiesfor reducing the number of qubits in the Hamiltonian.363Since
not all the HEA ansatzes conserve the number of particles, aconstrained minimization method must be employed in cases
where the number of particles is conserved, using the number
of particles as a constraint. In general, in order to approach theaccuracy of methods like UCCSD, the number of layers has togrow rapidly, even to an extent that the number of parametersapproaches or surpasses the size of the Hilbert space.
346As in
the case of other variational algorithms, a better understandingof the scaling of accuracy with the number of layers fordiﬀerent versions of this family of ansatzes is required.
Alternative Approaches to State Preparation. In gate-
model quantum computers, it is important to ﬁrst initialize the
computer into a known state, and to do so with high accuracy.Typically, the form of the initial state is a product state such as|0...0 ⟩, which is simple to prepare because each qubit can be
addressed individually. Once an initial state is prepared, theevolution of the quantum state through the computer isdetermined by the sequence of gates that the algorithm callsfor. While improving circuit ansatzes help reduce the overhead
in the depth of a quantum circuit after the quantum computer
has been initialized, there can be an advantage in preparingmore complicated initial states that are closer to the ﬁnal state.
For example, VQE relies on ultimately preparing (and thenmeasuring) an entangled state of many qubits. Thus, an initialstate that is already highly entangled could be advantageous topreparing a desired ground state.
Despite rapid advances in both theory and experiment for
quantum computing, signi ﬁcant e ﬀorts must be dedicated
toward maximizing the use of NISQ devices while accountingfor their limitations. As we have reviewed earlier in this section,the choice/design of the ansatz is a crucial component foralgorithmic performance. One particular strategy for loweringthe resource requirements for expressing quantum data (ofquantum states) is through the use of the quantumautoencoder (QAE) that combines ideas from both quantum
simulation and quantum machine learning. Speci ﬁcally, the
QAE
364is an HQC algorithm that encodes a set of quantum
states using a fewer number of quantum bits, as shown inFigure 8 . For instance, the wave function of molecular
hydrogen (in the minimal basis) at a particular bond lengthrequires four qubits to represent the occupancy of the groundstate. However, the set of these ground states lives on only aone-dimensional manifold in the four-qubit space. This meansthat the quantum information corresponding to this four-qubitstate can be represented by a single qubit. The task of a QAE istoﬁnd a unitary mapping that coherently maps this four-qubit
state to a single qubit. The payo ﬀforﬁnding such a unitarymapping is that it enables a type of generative modeling
approach called Compressed Unsupervised State Preparation(CUSP) that explores the latent space to ﬁnd a shorter
pathway to a desired ground state.
365CUSP uses an existing
VQE circuit ansatz, together with a QAE, to generate a newansatz that is shorter in gate depth and hence less vulnerable tonoise on a NISQ computer, resulting in more accurate VQEenergies.
5.1.2. Energy Estimation in VQE. After preparing the
parametrized trial state |Ψ(θ⃗)⟩, the next stage for the VQE
algorithm is to estimate the expectation value of the targetHamiltonian, E(θ⃗)= ⟨Ψ(θ⃗)|H|Ψ(θ⃗)⟩. In practice, this implies
estimating the value of E(θ⃗) up to a given precision, ϵ.
Arguably, the most common application of ab initio quantum
chemistry is the calculation of thermochemical properties, such
as reaction rates and binding energies. Reaction rates, for
example, are exponentially sensitive to changes in energy: achange of only 1.4 kcal/mol in the free energy (which isproportional to the energy) generates a change of 1 order ofmagnitude in the estimate of a reaction rate. This sensitivitymotivates the concept of chemical accuracy, which is astandard for the desired energy accuracy of 1 kcal/mol (1.59 ×
10
−3hartree, 43.3 meV) or less.92This requirement sets an
upper bound to the precision, ϵ, for energy estimation in VQE
and in general to any quantum simulation algorithm forchemistry.
One possible approach to estimating the energy is the PEA
approach, which provides an estimate of the energy in a single
state preparation with cost
ϵ()O1for error tolerance ϵ.
Unfortunately, to guarantee the success of PEA estimation,
all the operations must be executed fully coherently on thequantum computer, which is only possible using quantumerror correction. This requirement is unattainable on NISQdevices because the operations available on these devices aretoo error-prone to achieve useful quantum error correction. Toavoid the overhead of PEA, Peruzzo et al.
61suggested an
alternative scheme called Hamiltonian averaging for computing
the expectation value of local Hamiltonians.
Hamiltonian Averaging. The basic idea behind this
approach is that any Hermitian operator, such as the electronicstructure Hamiltonian, can be decomposed on the basis of
Pauli operators. Therefore, any Hermitian operator can be
written as
∑∑ σσ=+ +
ααα
αααα αα H hh ...
iii
iiii ii
1111
11
11 2 21212
1212
(69)
and by linearity the expectation value can be expressed as
∑∑ σσ ⟨⟩= ⟨ ⟩+ ⟨ ⟩+
ααα
αααα αα Hh h ...
iii
iiii ii
1111
11
11 2 21212
1212
(70)
where σα1α2...i1i2...represent a product of Pauli matrices, where ij
indicates the type of Pauli matrix and αjqubit indices. In the
case of approximation based on second quantized approaches,the Hamiltonian is directly obtained as a sum of Pauli
operators after a mapping from fermions to qubits is applied
(see Appendix B ). Unlike the PEA approach, where each k-
local Pauli operator requires O(k) circuit depth for the
implementation, Hamiltonian averaging only adds a constantfactor to the state preparation procedure, assuming parallelrotation and orbital readout is available. However, not all theHamiltonian terms can be measured simultaneously, whichChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510887


--- PAGE 33 ---
increases the number of measurements needed to achieve a
given accuracy. In general, the number of state preparationsand measurement cycles required to converge the energy to aprecision ϵwill scale roughly as M
2/ϵ2, where Mis the number
of terms in the Pauli decomposition of the Hamiltonian. Amore detailed analysis of the number of measurements takesinto consideration the structure of the Hamiltonian terms. Ingeneral, any Hamiltonian for simulation can be written as H=
∑
iMhiOi,w h e r e{ hi}r e p r e s e n t st h es e to fH a m i l t o n i a n
coeﬃcients and { Oi} corresponds to a set of Pauli operators.
Assuming that all the terms are measured independently, i.e.,Cov( ⟨O
i⟩,⟨Oj⟩)=0∀i≠j), the total variance of the estimator
of⟨H⟩will be given by the sum of the variances of the
individual Hamiltonian terms:
∑ϵ= ||⟨⟩
ϵhO Var( )
iM
ii
i22
2(71)
where Var( ⟨Oi⟩) denotes the variance of the estimator of ⟨Oi⟩.
In practice, we need to de ﬁne the precision at which each term
is going to be measured. A simple approach would be to
measure all the terms to the same accuracy, i.e., taking ϵi2=ϵ
M2.
Considering that Var( Oi)=1−⟨Oi⟩2=σi2, where σiis the
precision of ⟨Oi⟩, we can estimate the required number of
measurements, m,a s
∑∑ σ=
ϵ|| ≤
ϵ|| m hh11
iM
ii
iM
i 222
22
(72)
A more practical approach is to choose ϵi2to be proportional to
|hi|. This reduces the estimate in the number of measurements
to
∑∑ σ=ϵ|| ≤ϵ|| m hh11
iM
ii
iM
i22i
kjjjjjjy
{zzzzzzi
kjjjjjjy
{zzzzzz
(73)
which can be proved to be optimal by application of the
Lagrange conditions.366Therefore, the e ﬀective number of
measurements will be dependent on the magnitude of theHamiltonian coe ﬃcients, which is the case of electronic
structure correspond to linear combinations of one-electronand two-electron integrals, which in turn depend on the choiceof basis set for the calculation (see Appendix A for an
introduction to basis sets).
As noted before, the electronic structure Hamiltonians by
deﬁnition have O(N
4) terms; however, on a local basis the
number of non-negligible terms scales as O(N2), and advanced
techniques can evaluate these contributions in O(N) time.
This is the basis of linear scaling methods employed inquantum chemistry.92,367In the particular case of Gaussian-
type orbitals (GTOs), this scaling can be veri ﬁed by
considering the cuto ﬀs due to exponentially vanishing overlaps
between GTOs and bounds on the largest integral to estimatethe number of non-vanishing terms in the Hamiltonian.92,327
Although this scaling is guaranteed asymptotically, in practice,
the molecular size at which this scaling is observed depends on
the type of atoms in the system and the family of basis set
used.327This analysis applied to Hamiltonian averaging
showed that the number of measurements required forachieving precision ϵin the energy is expected to scale as
O(N
6/ϵ2) for molecules of su ﬃcient size, compared to the
formal O(N8/ϵ2) estimated based on the number of terms in
the Hamiltonian.327Moreover, this analysis justi ﬁes theintuitive strategy of neglecting Hamiltonian terms that are
under a certain threshold δ, such as the maximum δ≤ϵ
Nr, with
Nrbeing the number of removed terms. In practice, it has been
observed that δ=1 0−10is more than su ﬃcient to retain
quantitatively accurate results in molecular calculation with
GTOs.92,327,367
Alternatively, for Hamiltonians in the plane wave dual basis
(eq 44 ), the number of measurements required to estimate the
expectation values can be bounded as323
ϵΩ+
ΩON
N1114/3
2 2/3 4/3 2/3i
kjjjjji
kjjjy
{zzzy
{zzzzz
(74)
This bound is based on upper bounds to the norm of the plane
wave dual basis Hamiltonian applied to eq 73 . In this case, it is
possible to obtain further savings in the number of measure-
ments by exploiting the fact that the interaction ( V) and
potential terms ( U) of the Hamiltonian are diagonal and
commute with each other. Therefore, they allow the use of a
separate, unbiased estimation for the mean of the sum of these
terms.336The kinetic operator is not diagonal in the plane
wave dual basis, but it can be made diagonal by the application
of a fermionic fast Fourier transform (FFFT). This trick can beused to measure the kinetic operator. Correspondingly, the
number of measurements can be bounded as323
ηη∈⟨⟩ + ⟨⟩
ϵ⊆
ϵ+
ϵm OVTONN22
210/3 2/3
22/3 4/3
2i
kjjjjjy
{zzzzzi
kjjjjjy
{zzzzz
(75)
where ηis the number of electrons in the system, and T
represents the kinetic energy terms of the Hamiltonian in eq
44. This bound is obtained by bounding the norms of the
diﬀerent terms in the Hamiltonian assuming a neutral system
and a ﬁxed density. Since in ﬁnite molecules and bulk
materials, η∈O(N) ,t h i ss h o w st h a tt h en u m b e ro f
measurements does not scale worse than O(N4/ϵ2) for this
representation of the Hamiltonian. To avoid the extra cost of
implementing the FFFT, one could also measure U+Vat once
and measure Tby typical Hamiltonian averaging, which would
scale as O(N4/ϵ2).323
Strategies for Reducing the Number of Measurements in
Hamiltonian Averaging. The computational cost of operator
averaging is one of the factors contributing to the overall cost
of VQE prediction, the others being the depth of the circuit for
state preparation and the number of function calls required by
the optimization routine. Di ﬀerent strategies have been
proposed to reduce the cost of operator averaging. The ﬁrst
of these approaches is term truncation, brie ﬂy described in the
previous section. Implementation of this approach63,327
requires ordering the Hamiltonian terms according to the
norm of their coe ﬃcients, which correspond to the maximum
expected contribution to the total expectation value. After this,
we can select sequences of particular sums δk=∑i=1k|hi|that
correspond to the maximal bias introduced by neglecting the k
smallest terms. Subsequently, one could choose a constant C∈
[0,1) and remove the k*lowest terms such that δk*<Cϵ2,
where ϵis the intended accuracy. Correspondingly, the
remaining terms must be computed to accuracy (1 −C)2ϵ2,
and the number of measurements required would be
σ∑||−ϵ =* +h ()C ikM
ii1
(1 ) 12
22 , where the constant Ccan be adjustedChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510888


--- PAGE 34 ---
according to the problem instance and implementation
constraints to minimize the number of measurements.
A second strategy is to group commuting terms in the
Hamiltonian to reduce the number of state preparationsrequired for a single estimate of the energy, which was ﬁrst
described in McClean et al.63Commuting terms can be
measured in sequence without biasing the ﬁnal expectation.
This can be achieved, for example, by using ancilla qubits tomeasure the Pauli operators, which only adds a small overheadin gate depth. When using this technique, terms within thesame measurement group will be correlated, and therefore thecovariance between their expectation values will be di ﬀerent
from zero. This could increase or decrease the number ofmeasurements required for the set of terms depending onwhether the covariances are positive or negative, an e ﬀect
similar to the one observed in correlated sampling in classical
Monte Carlo simulations.
368In practice, implementing this
approach requires classical preprocessing to group the termsinto commuting groups using sorting algorithms,333with a
classical computational cost of O(M2) as a result of checking
commutativity between pairs of terms. Furthermore, one mustcheck whether a speci ﬁc grouping lowers the number of
measurements, which requires access to e ﬃcient approxima-
tions of the state of interest, since covariances are statedependent. Therefore, e ﬃcient classical algorithms for group-
ing Hamiltonian terms could bene ﬁt from e ﬃcient classical
approximation to the electronic structure problem.
63A
stronger condition that can be imposed on groups ofcommuting terms is to have all the terms being diagonal inthe same tensor product basis, as proposed in Kandala et al.
67
(for example, the set of terms { ZIXZ ,ZIXI,ZZXZ ,ZZXI }).
This guarantees that all the expectation values within the setcan be obtained from a single state preparation followed by aspeciﬁc set of single-qubit rotations to measure in the
appropriate tensor product basis.
More recently, Rubin et al.
366pointed out that N-
representability conditions on the fermionic reduced densitymatrices can be exploited to reduce the number of measure-ments in VQE calculations. N-representability conditionsdeﬁne a set of mathematical constraints which must be
satisﬁed by the reduced density matrices (RDM). The p-
electron RDMs ( p-RDMs) are de ﬁned as the set of expectation
values ⟨a
i1†aj1...aip†ajp⟩, for fermionic or bosonic systems. In the
speciﬁc case of fermionic RDMs, the main constraints are the
following:369
1. RDMs are Hermitian;
2. the 2-RDM is antisymmetric;
3. the ( p−1)-RDM can be obtained by contracting the p-
RDM;
4. the trace of each RDM is ﬁxed by the number of
particles in the system, e.g., the trace of the 1-RDM isequivalent to the number of particles;
5. RDMs correspond to positive semi-de ﬁnite density
operators.
In addition, constraints related to the total spin and spin
quantum numbers ( S
2and Sz) can be formulated for each
marginal.370The equality N-representability conditions can be
expressed in a qubit basis by mapping the RDM elements usinga standard transformation such as Jordan −Wigner or Bravyi −
Kitaev. The kth condition can be written as C
k=∑iMck,i⟨Oi⟩=
0, with Oibeing the same terms appearing in the target
Hamiltonian for VQE. These constraints provide extrainformation about the relations between expectation values
that can be exploited to reduce the number of measurements.The basic idea of the procedure proposed in Rubin et al.366is
to add the constraints to the original Hamiltonian to reducethe sum in eq 73 . Speci ﬁcally, this is equivalent to running
VQE for an alternative Hamiltonian of the form
∑∑ ∑ββ̂=+ = +
==H HC h c O
kK
kk
iM
i
kK
kki i
11,i
kjjjjjjy
{zzzzzz
(76)
where βis a set of real parameters. Notice that ⟨H⟩=⟨Ĥ⟩due
to the de ﬁnition of the N-representability conditions.
Correspondingly, based on eq 73 , the number of measure-
ments can be minimized by performing the followingoptimization:
∑∑
∑∑β
βσ+
+β
β=
=hc
hcmin or
miniM
i
kK
kki
iM
i
kK
kki i1,
1,i
kjjjjjjjy
{zzzzzzz
i
kjjjjjjjy
{zzzzzzz
(77)
with the second optimization depending on the availability of a
meaningful prior on the expectation values of the Hamiltonianterms. This optimization problem can be recast as a convex L
1
minimization method by writing the constraints and the
original Hamiltonian as a vector, where each position of thevector represents a fermionic term.366The optimal βcan be
found by applying standard optimization methods. Theapplication of this strategy to, for example, molecularHamiltonians showed reductions of around 1 order ofmagnitude in the number of measurements required.
366
Finally, another direction that deserves more exploration isthe use of Bayesian inference to estimate the expectation valuesof Hamiltonian terms, described in McClean et al.
63The use of
sensible choices of classical approximations could providepriors for Bayesian estimation potentially leading to reductionsin the number of measurements.
5.1.3. Optimization Methods. Several numerical studies
comparing the e ﬃcacy of di ﬀerent optimization methods have
been published since VQE was ﬁrst introduced; the original
paper
61used Nelder −Mead, a simple derivative-free optimiza-
tion algorithm. McClean et al.63studied VQE for optimizing
H2using the software package TOMLAB371to compare four
algorithms: Nelder −Mead, MULTMIN, GLCCLUSTER, and
LGO, ﬁnding that LGO was usually superior. Romero et al.348
simulated VQE for H4(a system of four hydrogen atoms),
using both gradient and derivative-free methods for theclassical optimization step. They used algorithms known asL-BFGS-B, COBYLA, Powell, and Nelder −Mead, observing
that the derivative-free methods Powell and Nelder −Mead
often had di ﬃculties converging to the correct answer in the
large parameter space required by VQE, with COBYLA and L-BFGS-B showing a better performance.
Romero et al.
348and Guerreschi and Smelyanskiy372
proposed quantum circuits to compute analytical gradientsfor HQC algorithms, the former in the context of VQE and thelatter in the context of the QAOA. Both studies compared thecost of numerical gradients relative to analytical ones, whichdepends on the cost function employed. In the case of QAOAapplied to the Max-Cut problem
372the authors found that for
quasi-Newton methods, numerical gradients required fewerChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510889


--- PAGE 35 ---
overall function calls than analytical gradients, and both out-
performed Nelder −Mead. This is in sharp contrast with VQE
applied to electronic structure Hamiltonians,348where the
conclusion is that analytical gradients o ﬀer a practical
advantage over numerical gradients. The numerical gradients
require a few orders of magnitude more measurements to
achieve the same accuracy. Both these studies also point outthe dependence of the achieved accuracy and convergence
times on the hyper-paramete rs chosen for the classical
optimizer.348,372
In experimental implementations of VQE on NISQ devices,
the accuracy of the optimization can be signi ﬁcantly lowered
by the ﬂuctuations on the measured properties caused by noise
andﬁnite measurement statistics. This is a major hurdle to the
implementation of VQE for larger systems, where the number
of parameters can be signi ﬁcant even for linear scaling ansatzes.
Correspondingly, most of the experimental implementations sofar have employed methods that better tolerate these
ﬂuctuations, such as Nelder −Mead and particle-swarm
optimization (PSO),373which are gradient free. More recently
the simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation
(SPSA) has been applied.374,375This method relies on
numerical gradients computed in random directions. Refer-
ences to these experiments are provided in Table 2 .
For small instances such as H 2in a minimal basis set that
require a single variational parameter, it is possible to sample
the energy landscape. In this case, the expectation values of theHamiltonian terms are computed within a certain range of the
variational parameters and subsequently ﬁtted using methods
such as trigonometric interpolations or Gaussian process
regression.64,72This procedure provides classical functions
(which model the values of the expectation values of theHamiltonian terms) as a function of the variational parameters:
⟨O
i(θ)⟩≈fi(θ). Subsequently, the optimization can be
performed on the ﬁtted models to simplify classical
postprocessing. These functions are convenient when applying
VQE to a family of Hamiltonians (e.g., ground-state
calculations along a path in the potential energy surface),since the same expectation values are used to compute all the
ground states, saving measurements.
Methods such as Nelder −Mead are limited to problems with
few parameters,376and more likely their application is not
scalable to large molecules. In contrast, SPSA is better fortreating more parameters and is also expected to be robust to
statistical ﬂuctuations.375However, being a method based on
numerical gradients, the accuracy and precision of SPSA are
also limited by the step size chosen for the gradient
discretization. Choosing a smaller step size implies lower
energy di ﬀerences and therefore more precision required for
the energy estimation. In fact, the number of measurementsrequired for the estimation of the gradient at a ﬁxed precision
increases quadratically with the inverse of the step size, as
shown by Romero et al.348Consequently, methods employing
numerical gradients require careful tuning of the hyper-
parameters throughout the optimization to minimize thenumber of measurements employed. Some heuristic have been
proposed for dynamically updating the hyperparameters of
SPSA in VQE calculations (see appendix of ref 67).
Nonetheless, more e ﬀorts are needed to design e ﬃcient
strategies to estimate energies and gradients to su ﬃcient
precision in VQE.
Ad i ﬀerent and complementary strategy to improve
optimization, and the quality of VQE results in general, is
error mitigation. This term groups a series of recent proposals
for improving the quality of the expectation values ofobservables measured on NISQ devices. Since estimation of
expectation values is at the heart of the VQE protocol, these
approaches have a direct bene ﬁt in the accuracy of the energies
and gradients measured in VQE, which in turn could improve
the overall performance of the optimization. Some of theproposals for error mitigation assume that the ﬁrst-order
contributions of the noise to the expectation values can be
removed by introducing a controllable source of noise in the
circuit of interest.
337,338,377,378Expectation values are estimated
at diﬀerent error levels and an extrapolation to zero noise is
performed using di ﬀerent mathematical techniques. Some ofTable 2. Representative Experimental Demonstrations of the VQE Algorithm Using Various Quantum Computer
Architectures
architecture/platform system of interestnumber of
physical qubits ansatzoptimization
routine/strategyacomputedproperties ref
photonic chip HeH+2 hardware-speci ﬁc parametrized
ansatzNelder−Mead ground-state energy 61
single trapped HeH+UCC Nelder −Mead ground- and
excited-stateenergies70
superconducting processor
(transmon qubits)H
2 2 UCC grid scan and
locally optimizeground-state energy 64
superconducting processor
transmon qubits)H2 2 “hardware-e ﬃcient ”ansatz SPSA ground-state energy 67
LiH 4 “hardware-e ﬃcient ”ansatz SPSA ground-state energy 67
BeH2 6 “hardware-e ﬃcient ”ansatz SPSA ground-state energy 67
ion trap processor (Ca+ions) H2 2 UCC grid scan and
locally optimizeground-state energy 72
LiH 3 approximate UCC grid scan and
locally optimizeground-state energy 72
superconducting processor
(transmon qubits)H2 2 hardware-speci ﬁc parametrized
ansatzPSO ground- and
excited-state
energies68
silicon photonic chip two chlorophyll units in 18-mer
ring of LHII complex2 “parametrized Hamiltonian ”
ansatz with truncation schemePSO ground- and
excited-stateenergies336
superconducting processor
(transmon qubits) via clouddeuteron 2 −3 UCC grid scan ground-state energy 69
aAbbreviations: SPSA, simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation; PSO, particle swarm optimization.Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510890


--- PAGE 36 ---
these methods have been successfully applied in experimental
demonstrations of VQE for small molecules.339However, it
has been pointed out that the successful application of some of
these approaches to bigger systems might require lower error
rates than those existing today.378
Other proposals for mitigating errors are the VQE subspace
expansion68,340and updating expectation values using marginal
constraints.366In the former case, described in more detail in
section 5.1.5 , the target Hamiltonian is expanded in a basis
built from the ground state obtained from a regular VQE
procedure at the cost of an additional number of measure-ments. This new expansion allows for the calculation ofexcited-state energies and a re ﬁned ground-state energy which
is found to be closer to the exact result. The second approachexploits the physical constraints of fermionic reduced density
matrices, described in section 5.1.2 , to update the reduced
density matrices measured experimentally. Although theenforcement of these conditions can increase the energy, theprocedure can improve the overall shape of the predictedpotential energy surfaces and derived properties such as forces.Finally, McArdle et al.
378have also proposed the use of easy-
to-implement stabilizer checks for molecular properties (e.g.,
electron number parity) to detect errors and discard faultystate preparations, which improves the overall VQE perform-ance. The so-called stabilizer-VQE can be implemented incombination with other error mitigation strategies. For a more
detailed description of error mitigation techniques we refer the
reader to ref 379.
The recent observation
341that the variational parameter
landscape is often plagued by the overabundance of “barren
plateaus ”implies that care must be taken when designing a
circuit ansatz for the VQE algorithm. By Levy ’s lemma, one
can prove that expectation values only substantially deviate
from their mean over an exponentially small fraction of theHilbert space. This implies that the use of an arbitrary orunstructured ansatz may be uninformative and expensive, asthe optimization algorithm would have to search through mostof the space before measuring a non-zero gradient. However,
this issue can be circumvented by using PMA that have
measurable gradients and thus could better guide theoptimizer. This is the case of UCC, where classical quantumchemistry methods such as Møller −Plesset second order
perturbation theory and traditional CC or CI can provideapproximate amplitudes to initialize the optimization. As
described in section 5.1.1 , the barren plateau phenomenon
presents a challenge to unstructured energy minimization inVQE. Besides selecting a well-motivated circuit ansatz, severalother strategies may be taken to address this issue. One ofthese strategies is the “annealed variational ”optimization
56
described above. This method can be naturally applied to
Hamiltonian variational ansatz, HEA and LDCA, where the
structure of the variational ansatz is naturally divided intolayers or circuit blocks that can be optimized following a block-by-block fashion. We could also adapt this method to ansatzessuch as UCC by separating the excitation operators into
subsets that are implemented and optimized sequentially.
Finally, an alternative strategy to break the optimization into
easier, smaller parts is the adiabatically assisted variational
quantum eigensolver (AAVQE) method.
380This method is
inspired by the adiabatic evolution of a ground state inquantum annealing. As in AQC, the method employs a
parametrized Hamiltonian of the form=− + Hss H s H() ( 1 )0 P (78)
where H0is the initial Hamiltonian, for which the ground-state
preparation is easily implemented (e.g., a local Hamiltonianmay be used), H
Pis the problem Hamiltonian, and s
interpolates between the two Hamiltonians as it is incremented
from 0 to 1. However, rather than dynamically tuning the
interpolation parameter (see Adiabatic Quantum Computinginsection 5.3.1 ), the interpolation parameter is used to adjust
the Hamiltonian from one VQE run to the next. The statepreparation parameters at each step are initialized by the
optimized parameters of the previous step. As long as the gap
ofH(s) does not become too small (see section 5.3.1 ), the
ground state of H(s) will lie close to the ground state of the
Hamiltonian H(s+Δs) in the subsequent step. Thus, AAVQE,
which runs VQE while incrementally adjusting the optimiza-tion landscape, appears to be another promising approach for
circumventing the barren plateau issue. Notice that this
method is not equivalent to implementing a Hamiltonianvariational approach, since it is the Hamiltonian and not thevariational ansatz that has an adiabatic parametrization.
Consequently, AAVQE could be combined with any choice
of variational ansatz for its execution.
5.1.4. Physical Realizations of VQE. To demonstrate the
capabilities of existing quantum devices, few-qubit simulations,
often without error correction, have been carried out in most
major architectures used for quantum information, as shown inTable 2 . The ﬁrst experimental demonstration of VQE was
performed in 2014.
61This experiment employed a two-qubit
photonic chip to variationally minimize the energy of HeH+.A
VQE experiment of the same molecule was achieved using a
system comprising a single trapped ion.70These experiments
served as proofs-of-principle for the VQE approaches appliedto chemistry but involved non-scalable simpli ﬁcations of the
Hamiltonians or non-scalable experimental procedures such asfull tomography. A scalable demonstration of both the IPEA
and VQE algorithms was carried out in 2016, employing three
superconducting qubits for simulating H
2in a minimal basis.64
These demonstrations were followed by the demonstration ofVQE with a hardware-based ansatz for H
2, lithium hydride
(LiH) and beryllium hydride (BeH 2) in a system with six
qubits67by the IBM quantum computing team. Similarly, the
ﬁrst scalable simulation o f VQE in ion trap quantum
computers was demonstrated for H 2and LiH using an
approximate implementation of the UCC ansatz withMolmer −Sorensen gates. In this demonstration, LiH was
simulated using an active space approach that exploited the
Bravyi−Kitaev mapping to generate an e ﬀective Hamiltonian
for this molecule in three qubits.72
In recent years, various full-stack platforms have been
introduced by IBM, Rigetti Computing, and Microsoft,supporting quantum computations via cloud computing. Onerecent study that leverages this availability of quantumhardware computed the deuteron binding energy using theVQE framework.
69
5.1.5. VQE for Excited States. Since the development of
the VQE algorithm by Peruzzo et al.,61numerous studies and
demonstrations of VQE focused on approximating ground
states of physical systems. In principle, the VQE algorithm was
designed as a modular framework, treating each component(i.e., state preparation, energy estimation, classical optimiza-tion) as a black-box that could be easily improved and/orextended. Recent studies have leveraged this ﬂexibility,Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510891


--- PAGE 37 ---
speciﬁcally applying di ﬀerent formulations of objective
functions to compute excited states, which are fundamentalto understanding photochemical properties and reactivities ofmolecules. In the following subsections, we highlight severalmethods extending the original VQE algorithm for approx-imating excited states for molecular systems.
Folded Spectrum and Lagrangian-Based Approaches.
Theﬁrst and perhaps the simplest extension consists of the
application of the folded spectrum method, which utilizes avariational method to converge to the eigenvector closest to ashift parameter λ.
This is achieved by variationally minimizing the operator H
λ
=(H−λI)2as described by Peruzzo et al.61This
methodology, though relatively straightforward to implement,requires a quadratic increase in the number of terms of the
eﬀective Hamiltonian. This translates to a signi ﬁcant increase
in the number of measurements needed, especially in the caseof quantum chemistry Hamiltonians.
336
A related approach consists of adding a set of constraints to
the original Hamiltonian in the VQE calculation to constructthe Lagrangian,63
∑λ=+ −LH Ss I ()
iii i2
(79)
where λiare energy multipliers, Siare sets of operators
associated with the desired symmetries, and siare the desired
expectation values for these sets of operators. The set ofoperators S
i, e.g., spin numbers, accounts for symmetries
whereby the energies are minimized by the appropriate excitedstates (with respect to the original Hamiltonian). We note thatS
i2and Simust be e ﬃciently measurable on the quantum
computer to ensure the e ﬃciency of the method. By solving
VQE for the Lagrangian instead of the original Hamiltonian, itis possible to converge to an approximation of the excited state.
More recently, two new Lagrangian-based approaches were
introduced for calculating excited-state energies without themeasurement overhead.
381Theﬁrst doubles the circuit depth
to measure overlaps between the ground state and theprepared state to put a penalty on the overlap with the groundstate. Choosing this penalty to be large enough ensures that theﬁrst excited state becomes the minimizer of the new cost
function. The second method works by a similar principle,except the size of the quantum register is doubled instead ofthe circuit depth. A SWAP test a circuit construction to
compare two quantum states (or quantum registers) bycomputing the overlap is then applied to incorporate a
penalty for the prepared state having overlap with the groundstate.
Linear Response: Quantum Subspace Expansion (QSE).
More recently, a methodology based on linear response hasbeen developed
340and demonstrated on existing hardware.68
In summary, this framework, called the quantum subspaceexpansion (QSE), extends the VQE algorithm and requiresadditional measurements to estimate the excited-state energies.That is, after obtaining the ground state |ψ⟩of a molecule using
VQE, an approximate subspace of low-energy excited states is
found by taking the linear combinations of states of the form |
O
iψ⟩,w h e r et h e Oiare physically motivated quantum
operators. For example, in fermionic systems, these operatorscould correspond to fermionic excitation operators. In thealgorithm, the matrix elements |ψO
iHO jψ⟩are computed on
the quantum device. The classical computation thendiagonalizes the matrix to ﬁnd the excited-state energies.While the QSE method bene ﬁts from the low coherence time
requirements of VQE, the quality of the excited states obtainedis subject not only to the quality of the ansatz employed inVQE but also to the errors induced by the linear-responseexpansion.
Witness-Assisted Variational Eigenspectra Solver
(WAVES). An alternative protocol that also utilizes VQE as a
subroutine to compute the ground state is WAVES.
336The
objective function in WAVES is augmented to include theenergy ( E) as well as an approximation for the entropy (a
purity term Tr[ ρ
C2]):
ρ=−·[ ] EE T(, ) T robj C2-7(80)
In this setup, a control ancilla qubit is considered along with
the trial state. Here, the control qubit behaves as an “eigenstate
witness ”, where its entropy measurement nears zero if the
optimized trial state is arbitrarily close to an eigenstate of theHamiltonian.
A tunable parameter T(that can be pre-optimized) is used
to bias toward excited states. In the ﬁrst iteration of WAVES, T
is set to 0 (i.e., implementing regular VQE) to compute theground state. Then, Tis tuned such that when the objective
function is optimized, the resulting trial states correspond toapproximate excited states. These states are fed into theiterative phase estimation algorithm (IPEA) to extract thecorresponding excited-state energies. For near-term devices,the IPEA procedure could be replaced by a Hamiltonianaveraging approach.
340
5.1.6. Calculation of Molecular Properties with VQE.
Obtaining the ground state for a molecular system is usuallyjust the ﬁrst step in a quantum chemistry study. In most cases,
chemists are interested in a variety of molecular properties thatprovide insights into the chemistry of the target system. Someof these properties, such as the dipole moment and the chargedensity, can be computed by measuring the correspondingoperators represented in the basis set employed for the VQE.For example, the expectation values of one-electron ( E
1) and
two-electron ( E2) operators can be calculated using the same
1-RDM and 2-RDM measured for the optimal state obtainedfrom VQE:
∑⟨⟩= ⟨ ⟩†Eo a a
pqpq p q1
(81)
∑⟨⟩= ⟨ ⟩††Eo a a a a
pqrspqrs p q r s2
(82)
where the coe ﬃcients orepresent expansion coe ﬃcients. Other
properties might require the estimation of k-RDMs, with k>2 ,
which requires a larger number of measurements.
The information on the RDMs measured in the VQE
procedure can be used to connect the VQE algorithm withcomplementary classical algorithms for the calculation of otherproperties or energy re ﬁnement. One possibility is to combine
VQE calculations on active spaces with multi-referenceperturbation theory techniques implemented on a classical
computer to add dynamical correlation to the calculations, as
suggested in.
366For example, n-valence electron perturbation
theory382requires measurement of the 3-RDM and 4-RDM in
order to compute the corresponding energy correction. Toavoid the measurement cost of estimating these RDMs, acumulant approach that approximates this correction usingonly the 1-RDM and 2-RDM could be employed.
383OtherChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510892


--- PAGE 38 ---
techniques that could be implemented using this strategy are
canonical transformation theory132and perturbative explicit
correlated corrections.384,385Similarly, the VQE algorithm can
be used as a subroutine for energy calculation and interfacedwith classical routines for geometry optimization andcalculation of thermodynam ic properties. In all these
calculations, an important factor to consider is the impact ofmeasurement noise, especially when iterative procedures areinvolved. Investigating the extension of VQE to the calculationof molecular properties common in classical quantumchemistry is an important direction of research for HQCtechniques.
5.2. Other Hybrid Quantum −Classical Algorithms for
Chemistry
In this section, we highlight several other HQC algorithms that
may be useful in the context of quantum chemistry. Theserecent algorithms highlight the opportunity for continuedinnovation in the development of HQC algorithms.
5.2.1. Variational Quantum Simulator. A common
explanation for the e ﬃciency of Hamiltonian simulation is
the following: as a controllable quantum system, the quantumcomputer can be made to evolve in a way which mimics the to-be-simulated quantum system. Surprisingly, this canonicalapproach to quantum simulation, that was detailed in section 4 ,
is not the only method for accomplishing this task. Motivatedby the hopeful prospects of near-term quantum algorithms,such as VQE, Li and Benjamin
66introduced a variational
quantum algorithm which implements Hamiltonian simulation,known as the variational quantum simulator algorithm.
Instead of applying quantum gates which simulate
Hamiltonian dynamics, the variational quantum simulatoralgorithm applies a series of tunable gates to prepare a tunableoutput state. The evolution is discretized ( t
1,t2, ...), such that
the task of the algorithm is to determine a series of circuitparameter settings ( θ⃗
1,θ⃗2, ...) for which the subsequent output
states ( U(θ⃗1)|ψ0⟩,U(θ⃗2)|ψ0⟩, ...) approximate the time-evolved
states ( |ψ(t1)⟩,|ψ(t2)⟩, ...) according to the Schro ̈dinger
equation. The algorithm achieves this by invoking thevariational principle: the optimal “path ”in parameter space
for expressing the dynamics is the one which is stationary
with respect to variation of the action,
∫ tdtt
ifψθ⟨⃗|t(( ) )
ψθ−|⃗⟩ ( ) iH t (( ) )td
d. The Euler −Lagrange equation derived
from this variation −minimization problem determines a
diﬀerential equation for the evolution of the parameters θ̇M÷◊÷
=V ⃗. The crux of the algorithm is that the entries of the matrix
Mand vector V ⃗can be estimated from measurements made on
the quantum computer. It is important to note that thesemeasurements are facilitated by using an ancilla qubit which iscoupled to the system register through controlled-unitarygates. For details of the measurement scheme used todetermine MandV ⃗, refer to ref 66.
Each subsequent setting for the parameters is then
determined by the update rule:
θθ⃗=⃗−+⃗+−
+ MV t t ()ii i i11
1 (83)
This matrix inversion and multiplication is carried out by a
classical processor. The role of the quantum computer is toexplore families of output states, U(θ⃗)|ψ
0⟩, which are unlikely
to be representable on a classical computer, and to use thesestates to e ﬃciently estimate the entries of MandV ⃗.5.2.2. Imaginary-Time Variational Quantum Simula-
tor. The variational quantum simulator technique has been
developed further for problems beyond quantum simulation.In the work by McArdle et al.,
386a variant of the variational
quantum simulator is used for preparing certain usefulquantum states. The key insight of that paper is that thetime evolution in the variational quantum simulator algorithmcan be replaced by imaginary-time evolution, e
−i(−iτ)H=e−τH.
The functioning of the algorithm is similar to the variational
quantum simulator algorithm, apart from replacing twith−iτ.
Imaginary-time evolution is useful for preparing a thermal stateat temperature Twith respect to the Hamiltonian: ρ(T)=
e
−H/T/tr(e−H/T). If the system is initialized in the completely
mixed state I/d, then the imaginary-time evolution of τ= 1/2 T
will yield a thermal state,ττ−− −ee eHI
dHH T/∝e−H/T. A thermal
state can be used for preparing approximations to the ground
state of the Hamiltonian by taking the limit T→0, since, for a
non-degenerate Hamiltonian |ψgs⟩⟨ψgs|= lim T→0e−H/T/tr-
(e−H/T).
With approximate preparation of a Hamiltonian ’s ground
state, this algorithm can be used as an alternative to the VQEalgorithm. Initial simulations show that this method iscompetitive with the traditional gradient descent approach ofthe VQE. Hardware implementations which directly comparethe two methods are still needed.
5.2.3. Imaginary-Time Variational Quantum Simula-
tor for Excited States. The imaginary-time variational
quantum simulator can be used as a substitute for VQE. Justas variants of VQE have been developed for determiningexcited-state energies of Hamiltonians,
340,381a variant of the
imaginary-time variational simulator has been proposed to dothe same.357
Similar to the excited-state energy methods described in
section 5.1.5 , the VQS version of determining excited-state
energies iteratively builds up the spectrum starting with theground-state energy. Furthermore, in both approaches, eachstep introduces a penalty term to the Hamiltonian that isproportional to the projector onto the previously foundeigenstate. As proposed before,
381a short-depth swap test
circuit is added357to measure the contributions to the
Hamiltonian from the additional projectors. The di ﬀerence
in the VQS version for determining excited states is that thesepenalty terms added to the Hamiltonian alter the imaginary-time dynamics, rather than the cost function that is optimized.
The value of these algorithms is that they provide alternative
approaches to several established quantum algorithms. Animportant caveat regarding these alternative algorithms is that,as with VQE, they are heuristic. There are no guarantees ontheir performance, and their proper functioning can only beestablished on a case-by-case basis. Furthermore, the true testof such heuristic algorithms will be when they are implementedon hardware. So, while these algorithms, along with VQE, arepromising candidates for making use of near-term quantumdevices, more substantial experimental testing is needed todetermine their potential for scalability.
5.3. Non-Gate-Based Methods for Quantum Chemistry
5.3.1. Adiabatic. The results discussed so far are based on
gate model quantum computers, which can be broadlycategorized as the “digital ”approach to quantum simulation.
The overall unitary quantum evolution being simulated iseventually decomposed into a sequence of elementaryoperations called quantum gates in a way similar to howChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510893


--- PAGE 39 ---
logic gates underlie classical computers. However, there is an
alternative “analog ”approach to quantum computing based on
adiabatic quantum evolution73that has also gained much
attention in the quantum information community. Rapidexperimental progress has been underway to scale-up devicesfor realizing AQC architectures (D-Wave Systems Inc., 2018).
In the context of quantum chemistry, research has focused
on the analog simulation of molecules by mapping theelectronic structure problem to a Hamiltonian of spins withadditional coupling terms,
387although proposals exist for
simulating chemical reactions388−390and protein folding
simulations.391,392We will illustrate the analog simulation of
electronic structure in the case of hydrogen in a minimal basisset, as shown in ref 387. The Hamiltonian of molecular
hydrogen in the minimal basis mapped to a four-qubit system,using the Bravyi −Kitaev transformation, takes the following
form:
194,387
μμ μ μ μ=+ + + + H IZ Z Z Z Zelec 12 1 32 43 512 (84)
μμ μ μ+++ +ZZ ZZ X ZX Y ZY613 724 8123 912 3 (85)
μμ μ+++ ZZZ ZZZ ZZZ10123 11134 12 23 4 (86)
μμ μ+++ XZ XZ YZ YZ ZZ ZZ13123 4 1412 3 4 15123 4 (87)
We refer to Appendix C.3 for a derivation and description of
this formula. A suitable adiabatic quantum computer would be
able to e ﬀectively encode such a spin Hamiltonian. It would
then evolve the system from an “easy ”Hamiltonian (such as
the transverse ﬁeldH0=∑iXi) with known ground state to the
spin Hamiltonian of interest, therefore encoding the groundstate of the molecule in its ﬁnal state.Two major challenges in successfully implementing this
adiabatic evolution are keeping the energy scales well belowthe size of energy gaps in the Hamiltonian throughout theevolution and realizing the many-body interactions. For the
ﬁrst issue, the energy scales that must be considered are
temperature and speed with which the Hamiltonian is changed.Thermal ﬂuctuations which drive the system out of the ground
state can be mitigated by keeping the system at extremely lowtemperatures. Additionally, the Hamiltonian must be changed
slowly enough relative to the transition energy of the ﬁrst
excited state (the energy gap) so that non-adiabatic transitionsdo not drive population out of the ground state. For thesecond issue, certain many-body terms in the Hamiltonian,
such as three- and four-body terms X
1Z2X3andY1Z2Y3Z4, are
diﬃcult to implement experimentally. Techniques exist to
reduce them to two-body terms by adding ancilla qubits andencoding the correct couplings in the lowest eigenstate of adiﬀerent Hamiltonian, which is commonly called gadgetiza-
tion.
54,222,393−395Although gadgetization schemes have greatly
improved over the past decade, they provide limited tunabilityover the couplings that are required to construct the problemHamiltonian. This poses a challenge as molecular Hamil-tonians and the adiabatic evolution require the spread of
coupling term strengths over multiple orders of magnitude.
Therefore, experimental progress in the ﬁeld of AQC for
chemistry applications hinges on the development of non-gadgetized, highly tunable multi-spin couplers that eitherdirectly encode the problem Hamiltonian or reduce the
mapping overhead of gadgetization.
5.3.2. Linear Optics. As we have seen earlier, much of the
work in quantum simulation is related to the structure of atoms
and molecules, such as electronic structure, which are typically
Figure 9. Left: Sketch of the photoelectric spectrum of the ionization of a molecule. The energy level diagram shows the electronic ground and
excited state of the molecule, with its corresponding vibrational energy levels. Vibronic transitions are allowed between the two distinct electro nic
states, with the intensity of the peaks given by the wave function overlap integral ⟨vk′m|v0⟩. According to the Franck −Condon principle, due to the
slower motion of nuclei the most intense peak in the vibronic spectrum corresponds to the vertical transition in the energy level diagram (bluearrow). The whole spectrum is known as the Franck −Condon pro ﬁle (FCP). Right: Modi ﬁed boson sampling device to simulate the FCP. An
initially prepared squeezed-coherent state of light (dashed blob represents the resulting photonic entangled state) is sent through a photonic cir cuit,
where judiciously chosen beam splitters and phase shifters implement the Doktorov rotation U. Sampling from the output distribution of this
apparatus yields the FCP, up to a certain error ϵ, given by the number of measurements.Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510894


--- PAGE 40 ---
fermionic in nature. However, bosonic dynamics govern many
other aspects of chemical systems; for instance, the vibrationalmodes of molecules can be described by phonon transitions,which obey bosonic statistics. While one could imaginedevising a gate-model quantum algorithm to simulate thissystem, optical quantum systems are native to bosonic statisticsand represent a platform for carrying out this simulation moreeﬃciently than encoding the problem into a qubit formalism.
Theﬁrst realization of this protocol was introduced by Huh
and Yung
245and targeted the simulation of the FCP. This
work and its successors369,397are the only examples of native
simulation of bosonic chemical systems on a quantum deviceto date.
Insection 3 , we discussed some of the complexity issues
related to computing distributions whose probability ampli-
tudes are derived from hafnians and matrix permanents. Here
we give a description of how the algorithm works. The goal isto compute the FCP by sampling from the output distributionof a modified boson sampling device, as shown in Figure 9 .
This modi ﬁcation of the optical apparatus stems from the
unitary transformation ( eq 19 ) that encodes the molecular
problem.
234On top of the M-dimensional rotation of the
bosonic modes given by the Duschinsky rotation R̂U, one has
to include the displacement D̂δcaused by the di ﬀerent minima
of the nuclei in the electronic ground and excited states,together with the squeezing Ŝ
Ω′†that photons undergo for
transitioning to di ﬀerent frequency states ( Ω′→Ω). These
eﬀects are encoded in the initial state preparation, which can
be written as a squeezed coherent state |ψ⟩=ŜΩD̂δ|vac⟩. The
unitary rotation R̂Uis implemented in a linear optics setup and
precedes the last squeezing operation ŜΩ′†.T h es e c o n d
squeezing operation might be challenging to implement inoptical setups, for which Huh et al. proposed a more e ﬃcient
setup, compressing the two squeezing operations into theinitial state, so that the FCP simulation is isomorphic to aGaussian boson sampling problem.
243
Given this setup, the following hybrid classical −quantum
sampling algorithm can e ﬃciently generate the FCP pro ﬁle at
T=0K :
1. With the information on the potential energy surfaces
obtained from electronic structure calculations, calculatethe parameters that de ﬁne the Doktorov transformation.
The electronic structure method could be a classicalapproach such as TD-DFT but eventually also aquantum computation.
2. Build a Gaussian boson sampler as described above that
implements this Doktorov transformation and sampleson the phonon number basis, and collect the photonnumbers { m
k} in each mode.
3. For every detection event estimate the corresponding
associated energy E=ℏωkmkwhere mkis the number of
detected photons and increment its corresponding binby one unit.
4. Repeat the sampling N
samp times until the estimated
statistical error is below a given threshold ϵFCP.
5. Output the normalized pro ﬁle of the counting statistics.
This result has recently motivated proof-of-principle
experimental quantum simulations of molecular spectroscopicsystems with linear optics.396The paper by Clements et al.396
is the ﬁrst instance of an experimental FCP of a small molecule,
tropolone. The improved algorithm accounts for theunavoidable e ﬀects of experimental imperfections. As such itis an excellent example of a scalable simulation in the absence
of error-correcting techniques. Sparrow et al.397simulated the
vibrational quantum dynamics of a variety of molecules (H 2CS,
SO3, HNCO, HFHF, N 4, and P 4), in both the harmonic and
anharmonic regimes, using a re-programmable photonic chip.
Linear optics is a natural platform for the simulation of
vibrational quantum dynamics, as photons have the sameboson statistics as the vibrational excitations (phonons).Nevertheless, other physical platforms such as trapped ionsor superconducting circuits have also proven useful insimulating vibrational degrees of freedom. In particular, Shenet al.
398reproduced the molecular vibronic signal of SO2using
solely the vibrational excitations in a trapped ion device.Superconducting circuits have no experimental realizations asof yet ,but promising architectures have been theoretically
proposed. For instance, the proposal by Olivares et al.
399
involves of superconducting resonators interacting through
tunable couplers. In their approach the authors performed aquantum quench in the superconducting simulator, initiallyprepared in the molecular ground state. The abrupt changetakes the system out of equilibrium, in a way that the systemrelaxes to the ground state populating the resonators with adistribution that resembles that of the FCP. Additionally, apolynomially scaling algorithm for e ﬃciently calculating the
full FCP was introduced for the gate model by Sawaya andHuh,
400based on QPE. This algorithm can e ﬃciently include
often-essential anharmonic vibrational e ﬀects, a primary
advantage over the boson sampling approach, which dealsonly with harmonic vibrations. A related work provides anoverview of many vibrational processes ripe for simulating onthe gate model, including calculating individual Franck −
Condon factors, described by McArdle et al.
401Other studies
include a hardware implementation for calculating a one-dimensional method (Joshi et al.402) and an annealing
algorithm for calculating low-lying vibrational states (Teplu-khin et al.403).
6. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK
Quantum chemists have come to embrace a set of computa-tional tools which have driven much innovation in chemistryover the past half century. As quantum computers becomeavailable, many of these computational tools will besupplemented with, or even replaced by, quantum computa-tions. Furthermore, quantum computation will likely inspirenew theoretical approaches and computational methods forsolving problems in chemistry. As a precedent, consider theway that early computational tools gave rise to the invention ofMonte Carlo methods.
404Today ’s quantum chemists face an
impending disruption of their ﬁeld. As with the previous
computational revolution in quantum chemistry, the practi-tioners and early adopters will drive much of the innovation.This Review has aimed to provide the perspective and basictools helpful in beginning the practice of using quantumcomputation for chemistry.
In the near term, quantum computation will likely ﬁrst be
used for ab initio electronic structure calculations in quantum
chemistry. Quantum algorithms for chemistry, then, should be
viewed as alternatives to the state-of-the-art post-Hartree −
Fock methods such as coupled-cluster, Møller −Plesset
perturbation theory, and dens ity-matrix renormalization
group techniques. Such calculations often su ﬀer from
inaccuracies due to approximations of the quantum electronicwave function (cf. section 2.2 ). Quantum computers provide aChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510895


--- PAGE 41 ---
solution to this problem by naturally handling wave functions
that span the full Hilbert space to estimate energies, electricpolarization, magnetic dipoles, reduced density matrices, etc.The canonical problem that is expected to be solved is thecomputation of ground- and excited-state energies of smallmolecules. Such calculations serve as the starting point for
computing many useful quantities, such as reaction pathways,
binding energies, and rates of chemical reactions.
There are two distinct approaches to estimating the
electronic ground-state energies. The ﬁrst method, proposed
by Aspuru-Guzik et al.,
41uses the quantum phase estimation
algorithm (QPEA) to make quantum measurements of the
energy of a trial wave function, as described in section 4.1.2 .
Although promising, this method requires the use of quantumerror correction to properly function, and it is therefore notfeasible using near-term quantum devices.
In contrast, the second method for estimating ground-state
energies was speci ﬁcally developed to be deployable on
currently available quantum hardware, without a dependence
on quantum error correction for proper functioning. Thisalgorithm, known as the variational quantum eigensolver(VQE), as described in section 5.1 , has become the focus of
the state-of-the-art quantum experiments.
64,67It is possible that
theﬁrst commercial use of quantum computers will involve
applying the VQE algorithm to predict the electronic structureproperties of small molecules. In the few years since itsinvention, there has been signi ﬁcant algorithmic development
surrounding the VQE algorithm.
340,345,346,381Yet, there
remains room for innovation surrounding this and other
variational quantum algorithms. It is possible that these
innovations, coupled with advances in hardware, will enablecommercial utility of quantum devices far sooner thananticipated. This crossover point will likely be arrived atthrough the synergistic collaboration between quantumchemists, quantum information scientists, and quantum deviceengineers.
Already, insights from quantum chemistry have led to
substantial improvements in quantum algorithms. Variationalansatzes borrowed from classical quantum chemistry such asthe unitary coupled cluster have informed state preparationtechniques
348in several quantum algorithms. The quantum
subspace expansion technique, developed by McClean et al.,340
was motivated by the concept of linear response of the groundstate. Finally, the N-representability problems and the 2-RDMconstraints inspired the methods described by Rubin et al.
366
for improving expectation value estimates in VQE. Yet, manyavenues remain to be explored. For example, a recent paper405
initiated the use of low-rank tensor decompositions forimproving the performance of certain quantum algorithmsfor chemistry simulation. Such techniques should ﬁnd a
broader range of applicability in quantum algorithms.Furthermore, as techniques in quantum algorithms mature, itis likely that methods from perturbation theory will be useful inpushing the capabilities of quantum computers, especially inregard to active-space methods.
It is di ﬃcult to predict the course of quantum computing in
the long term. In particular, it is di ﬃcult to predict when or if
algorithms on near-term noisy intermediate-scale quantumdevices will outperform classical computers for useful tasks.But it is likely that, at some point, the achievement of large-scale quantum error correction will enable the deployment of ahost of so-called error-corrected quantum algorithms, which in
many cases have theoretical guarantees on their performance.These error-corrected algorithms include the celebrated
Grover search algorithm,
38Shor ’s factoring algorithm,35and
the Harrow, Hassidim, and Lloyd ’s linear system of equations
algorithm.257Regarding quantum chemistry, quantum error
correction would enable the use of the various Hamiltoniansimulation algorithms, as described in section 4.1 . These
Hamiltonian simulation algorithms can be used to simulate thedynamics of quantum systems. But, more importantly,Hamiltonian simulation serves as a subroutine for other
algorithms, such as the QPEA. Thus, with quantum error
correction, the QPEA could become a viable alternative optionto the VQE for ground-state energy estimation. That said,many of the techniques that have and will be developed for theVQE will likely be employed for preparing the initial state in
the phase estimation algorithm.
The use of quantum error correction also stands to improve
the performance of variational quantum algorithms such asV Q E .F o ri n s t a n c e ,e r r o rc o r r e c t i o nc o u l dl e a dt oa nimprovement in the preparation of good ansatz states for theVQE, as described in section 5.1.1 . However, a possible future
scenario is that, by the time useful, large-scale quantum error
correction is achieved, the dichotomy between error-corrected
algorithms and non-error-co rrected algorithms will have
become blurred. Already, several methods have beenintroduced which aim to bridge the gap between these twoclasses of quantum algorithms.
274,406,407
The landscape of quantum algorithm development has
recently been changing quite dramatically. With the arrival of
usable quantum devices,408,409we have now entered a
prototype era in the ﬁeld of quantum algorithms. Use of
these devices has and will continue to spur the development ofmany new quantum algorithms at a substantially increased rate.
In particular, the ability to test performance on real quantum
devices facilitates the development of heuristic quantumalgorithms.
61,66,340,345,349,364,406In the past few years, several
papers have proposed new quantum algorithms along withexperimental demonstrations on quantum devices.
410,411This
points to the increasing value in having quantum algorithm
developers working closely with quantum machines. Fortu-
nately, this synergy has been ampli ﬁed by the development of
software platforms such as Rigetti ’sp y Q u i l ,412IBM ’s
QISKit,413ETH Zu ̈rich ’s ProjectQ,414Intel ’s qHipster,415
Google ’s Cirq,416and Xanadu ’s Strawberry Fields.417
Any reasonable forecast on the timing of the quantum utility
crossover point is given with a wide margin of error. The more
conservative estimates predict that this crossover will occur in15−20 years.
418However, the most optimistic estimates
predict that quantum computers will solve useful problemsin 2−5 years.
419The estimated dates for reaching this horizon
are strongly determined by progress in hardware development
and are extrapolated based on recent advances in quantum
device technology.67,408,420,421However, quantum algorithm
development also serves to in ﬂuence these estimates. Quantum
simulation for quantum chemistry provides a rather strikingexample. Over the past 5 years, as outlined in section 4.2.2 , the
asymptotic scaling of quantum simulation algorithms for
quantum chemistry has been dramatically improved from a
high-degree polynomial to sublinear in the number of orbitals.Furthermore, continued development in quantum errorcorrection
254,422and error-mitigation techniques66,337will
also improve prospects. So, while progress in quantum
hardware development carries us toward the utility horizon,Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510896


--- PAGE 42 ---
progress in quantum algorithm development moves this
landmark itself closer into our reach.
With this perspective, then, there is ample opportunity for
quantum chemists and quantum theorists to make valuablealgorithmic contributions toward the quest for useful quantumcomputation. So far, many of the quantum approaches takeinspiration from the standard classical techniques. For example,the VQE algorithm can be viewed as a quantum version ofRitz ’s variational method. With novel computational means,
there is an opportunity for developing more quantum
chemistry methods which truly have no classical analogs.Quantum computing for quantum chemistry is likely todevelop into a rich sub ﬁeld of quantum chemistry. Now is an
opportune time to enter into this emerging research ﬁeld.
Through cross-disciplinary engagements, early practitioners of
these novel computational tools will usher in a renaissance for
computational methods in chemistry.
APPENDICES
A. Quantum Chemistry Basis Sets
Wave function ansatzes for the electronic structure problem,where the total wave function is approximated as a product of
one-electron functions, or methods based in second quantiza-
tion techniques, where the system is represented in the Fockbasis, require the introduction of a set of system-dependent,one-particle functions ϕ(x
i), where xirepresents the spatial and
spin coordinates of a single electron. In practice, the set of one-particle functions is ﬁnite, introducing an approximation error
associated with a truncated representation of the Hilbert space,or basis-set incompleteness. Furthermore, these one-electronfunctions, also called spin-orbitals, are usually expanded aslinear combinations of a set of standard system-independentfunctions, which are called the basis set functions . Choosing
basis set functions with the right mathematical properties cansigniﬁcantly facilitate the evaluation of the Hamiltonian
elements and expectation values.
Ideally, basis set functions should be designed to capture the
physics of the problem, such that a good representation can beachieved using as few functions as possible. Correspondingly,the performance of the basis set is usually measured as thediﬀerence with the undiscretized problem, which would
correspond with a hypothetical in ﬁnite basis set. A good
basis set should allow for a systematic and quickly convergingextrapolation to this basis set limit . Furthermore, basis sets
should have a mathematical form that facilitates the evaluationof molecular integrals and should be able to accurately describenot only total energies but also other properties. The existingbasis sets in computational chemistry o ﬀer diﬀerent levels of
compromise among these desired qualities.
The ﬁrst and most important aspect to consider in the
choice or design of a basis set is the nature of the problem.Molecular systems can be roughly categorized into two types:periodic systems and isolated molecules. The ﬁrst case
describes extended systems modeled as unit cells with periodicboundary conditions, such as crystals. In periodic systems, the
periodic density does not vanish exponentially far away from
the nuclei, unlike the case of isolated molecules. Molecularcrystals and large biomolecules can be considered intermediatecases between these two extremes. Traditionally, periodicsystems have been described using plane-wave basis setswhereas the basis sets for isolated molecules have beendominated by basis sets with atom-centered functions.In isolated molecules, the electronic density is highly peaked
around the nuclei and vanishes exponentially away from them,which justi ﬁes the chemical view of molecules as atoms
interacting mostly through their outermost regions. Thisintuition applied to basis sets inspired the linear combinationof atomic orbitals (LCAO) method, which conceivesmolecular spin-orbitals as linear combinations of a ﬁxed set
of atomic basis set functions, also called atomic orbitals (AOs).This framework has the advantage of providing a systematicway of constructing basis sets for molecules by keeping adataset of AOs for most elements in the periodic table.
The functional form of atomic basis sets is inspired by the
solutions of the Schro ̈dinger equation for hydrogen-like atoms
(one electron and one nucleus), which have the followinggeneral form:
θϕ Φ⃗=rR r Y() ( ) (, )nl l m , (88)
where nis the natural quantum number, land mare the
angular momentum and magnetic quantum numbers, Ylm(θ,ϕ)
is a spherical harmonic function, Rnl(r) is a product of Laguerre
polynomials and a term decaying exponentially with r, and ( r,
θ,ϕ) are spherical coordinates.
Slater-type orbitals (STOs) have the same structure as the
orbitals of hydrogenic atoms, with the radial function taking
the form
=ζ−−R rN r() ennr STO 1(89)
where Nis a normalization constant and ζis called the orbital
exponent. The exponent controls the degree of “diﬀuseness ”of
the orbital, meaning how fast the density vanishes as a functionof the nuclear distance. Consequently, within a basis setcomprised of several STOs, the minimum and maximumorbital exponents determine how far and how close theresulting wave function can be represented.
AO basis sets are then constructed by choosing a particular
combination of individual basis set functions for each of theorbitals in a given atom. For example, one could construct abasis set for any element in the second period of the periodictable by using ﬁve STOs with di ﬀerent exponents and
appropriate spherical harmonics to represent the 1 s,2s,2p
x,
2py, and 2 pzorbitals of the electronic con ﬁguration of these
elements. One could further improve the ﬂexibility of the basis
set by expressing each orbital as a linear combination of n
STOs with di ﬀerent exponents, instead of using a single one.
This strategy is known as the n-zeta representation.
The main advantage of STOs is that they capture the
appropriate behavior of electron density near and far from the
nuclei, with appropriate cusps for sorbitals at the nuclei and
exponential decaying tails. Unfortunately, the calculation of themolecular integrals using STOs has to be carried outnumerically because of the lac k of analytical solutions,
restricting the use of STOs to small molecules. This di ﬃculty
motivated the adoption of Gaussian-type orbitals (GTOs) asbasis sets. Spherical GTOs have the same angular form asSTOs but di ﬀer in the form of the radial function, which
adopts a Gaussian form instead of the original exponential:
=ζ−−R rN r() ennr GTO 12
(90)
Furthermore, GTOs can be also Cartesian, where the spherical
harmonic factor is replaced by a Cartesian product of the formx
iyjzk, where x,y, and zare the components of the radial
distance between the electron and the center of the gaussianChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510897


--- PAGE 43 ---
and the sum i+j+kdetermines the angular momentum.
GTOs have convenient analytical properties that allow foreﬃcient schemes for the comp utational evaluation of
molecular integrals. However, unlike STOs, they do notdescribe the cusp and exponential tails of the electronic densitycorrectly. A middle ground between accuracy in the
representation and computational ease is the contracted
GTOs scheme, where a linear combination of GTOs, alsoreferred to as primitives , is used to emulate a single STO. The
set of primitive STOs is called a contraction . Contracted GTOs
have been adopted as the main basis set functions forelectronic structure calculations in isolated molecules,
423with
diﬀerent families of basis sets created to ﬁtd iﬀerent purposes.
Although di ﬀerent families of Gaussian basis sets di ﬀer in the
speciﬁc parameters and optimization strategy employed, they
share similar structures and nomenclatures. Most families arecreated by augmenting the number of basis sets using the n-
zeta strategy. A minimal basis set corresponds to a 1-zeta,denoted as SZ (single zeta), comprising a number of orbitalscorresponding to the orbitals in the electronic con ﬁguration of
the period of the corresponding element. For example,
elements in the second row of the periodic table would have
ﬁve orbitals corresponding to 1 s,2s,2p
x,2py,2pzfor an SZ
basis set. The ﬂexibility of the basis set can be increased by
multiplying the number of contractions employed to representvalence orbitals, which play a more prominent role in themolecule energetics. For example, a double-zeta (DZ) basis setwould have twice the number of valence orbitals of a SZ basisset : 1 s,2s,2s′,2p
x,2px′,2py,2py′,2pz, and 2 pz′. The number of
orbitals can be also augmented by adding polarization
functions. Correspondingly, DZP (double-zeta plus polar-
ization) would include orbitals of angular momenta 2 forelements in the second row of the periodic table. In addition topolarization functions, di ﬀuse functions (GTOs with small
exponents) can be included to improve the description of tailsof the density, especially in system such as anions. Similarly,tight functions (GTOs with large orbitals exponents) can beincluded when the description of core electrons plays animportant role in the accuracy.
Apart from the strategies for augmentation of the basis set
size, there are two di ﬀerent contraction schemes: segmented
and general contracted basis sets. In segmented contractions,diﬀerent sets of primitive GTOs are used to represent di ﬀerent
orbitals. An example of segmented contracted basis is the 3-21G basis that belongs to the split-valence family (also called
the Pople family).
322In a 3-21G basis, core electrons are
described with a single contraction of 3 GTOs, while valenceelectrons are made of contractions of 2 and 1 GTOs. Incontrast, the general contractions approach employs the sameset of primitive GTOs to expand all the orbitals, with only thecombination coe ﬃcients di ﬀering between di ﬀerent orbitals.
An example of general contracted basis sets is the Dunningfamily (cc-pVXZ), which aims at calculating electroncorrelation by wave function methods.
424Modern basis sets
share elements of both segmented and general contraction
types. Examples of other commonly used families of atomic
basis sets include the Karlsruhe family,425the XZP family,426
the Sapporo family,427the ANO family,428thenZaP family,429
and the pc- nfamily.430Some Gaussian basis sets have been
developed to improve the calculation of magnetic andelectronic properties and to include relativistic e ﬀects. For a
more detailed description of atomic orbital basis sets, we referthe reader to refs 431and432.Atomic basis sets are well suited to describe electron
densities in isolated molecules, where the densities resemblethose of individual atoms. However, energy bands in periodicsystems are di ﬀerent from atomic orbitals. For example, in
metals, valence electrons have a behavior more similar to freeelectrons. Correspondingly, solutions to the particle-in-a-boxproblem can o ﬀer a better description of periodic systems,
giving rise to plane-waves (PW) basis sets, which have acomplex exponential form. In a three-dimension cell, a PW canbe expressed as
ϕπν=νrVr
L()1exp2i
kjjjy
{zzz(91)
for a wave with wavevector corresponding to the νth harmonic
of a box with length Land volume V. The size of the PW basis
set is determined by the chosen value of the maximum energyand the volume Vof the unit cell, and in contrast with atomic
basis sets, does not depend on the number of atoms within thecell. Correspondingly, the description of core electrons mightrequire a large number of PW basis sets due the large energies,and thus, PW are usually employed in combination withpseudopotentials to describe core electrons. Compared toGTOs, PW basis sets generally require an order of magnitudemore functions to achieve a similar accuracy.
Recently, the dual plane-wave basis set (dual PW),
corresponding to the Fourier transform of PW, has been
proposed as an alternative for electronic structure calculations
on quantum computers.
323PWs and their dual diagonalize the
kinetic and potential operators, respectively. The dual PWbasis set has the advantage of providing a more compactrepresentation of the molecular Hamiltonian in secondquantization. These functions have a form that resembles theSinc function, which is expressed as
π
π=xx
xSinc( )sin( )
(92)
The Sinc function is oscillatory in nature just like a plane wave,
but its amplitude decays to zero away from the expansion pointx. The dual PW and Sinc functions can be used as basis sets by
placing functions at a number of real-space grid points. Thequality of the basis set can be improved by decreasing theseparation in the grid.
B. Mappings to Qubits
In this section we introduce the two main approaches to
mapping second-quantized quantum chemistry Hamiltonians
to qubit Hamiltonians. We de ﬁne the mappings and discuss
their bene ﬁts, drawbacks, and variants. For a more-detailed
introduction to these various mappings, refer to McArdle etal.379
B.1. Jordan −Wigner Mapping
In the Jordan −Wigner mapping, each electronic orbital,
described by creation operator aj†is associated with a qubit j
via
σσ σ↔⊗ ⊗ ⊗⊗†
−+a I () . . . () ( )jz z j j 11 (93)
where σz=−1001Ä
ÇÅÅÅÅÅÅÉ
ÖÑÑÑÑÑÑand σ+=0100Ä
ÇÅÅÅÅÅÅÉ
ÖÑÑÑÑÑÑ. This induces a
correspondence between each second-quantized basis state
(aK†)iN... (a1†)i1|vac⟩and a corresponding computational basis
state |i1⟩⊗|i2⟩⊗...⊗|iN⟩, where each i1, ...,iNis 0 or 1. Notice
that the creation operators ai†act non-trivially on iqubits. ThisChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510898


--- PAGE 44 ---
is a consequence of the creation operator carrying out two
actions: the action of changing the occupation is carried outlocally by σ
i+, while the action of applying a phase according to
theparity (even or odd) of the occupations for orbital labels
less than iis achieved by a string of σz(see eq 93 ). The high
weight of the parity-counting phase can be costly for certainquantum simulation algorithms. So, while each spin-orbitaloccupation operator a
i†aiis local, acting only on the ith qubit,
other one-body operators ai†ajcan be very nonlocal due to the
high weight of the parity.
A dual version of the Jordan −Wigner mapping is the so-
called parity mapping.194Here, the parity operators are low-
weight, while the occupation operators become high-weight. Inthe parity mapping, the creation and annihilation operators are
σσ σ σ↔⊗ ⊗ ⊗ ⊗⊗†
−+
+ a I() ( ) () . . . ()j zj j xj xN 11 (94)
This de ﬁnition induces a transformation from Jordan −Wigner
product states to parity product states,
|⟩⊗ | ⟩→|⟩⊗| ⊕ ⟩⊗ | ⊕ ⊕ ⟩ ii i i ii i ... ... ...NN 11 1 2 1 (95)
where⊕indicates addition modulo-two. While the Jordan −
Wigner mapping stores the occupation of each spin-orbital ineach qubit, the parity mapping stores the parity in each qubit.
While the parity mapping is a valid transformation from
fermionic operators to qubits, so far, it has not been consideredas a useful contender for use in quantum simulation. Rather, itserves as a useful pedagogical tool for motivating the Bravyi −
Kitaev transformation introduced in the following subsection.
B.2. Bravyi −Kitaev Mapping
The Bravyi −Kitaev mapping193combines the advantages from
the Jordan −Wigner and parity mappings to yield creation and
annihilation operators which act non-trivially on O(log N)
qubits (i.e., have weight O(log N)). This is important for
quantum simulation, as larger-weight terms in the Hamiltonianrequire longer circuits for their simulation. The originalBravyi−Kitaev encoding is de ﬁned for the case that N=2
n.
In this case the maximum weight of any encoded aj†is exactly
log2Naccording to Havli ́ček et al.433The creation and
annihilation operators in the Bravyi −Kitaev mapping have a
more involved description than in the Jordan −Wigner or parity
mapping. For a full description of these operators, see Seeley etal.194We limit ourselves to presenting the transformation from
Jordan−Wigner product states to Bravyi −Kitaev product
states:
|⟩⊗ | ⟩→| ⟩⊗ ⊗| ⟩ ii b b ... ...NN 11 (96)
where bk=∑l=1k[βr]klilmod 2 and the matrix βris deﬁned
recursively as
β=11 (97)
ββ
β=+
01 ... 1
0 ... 0
0 ... 0rr
r1Ä
ÇÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÉ
ÖÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑ∂∂
(98)
As an example, in the case of N=23, the matrix de ﬁning the
Bravyi−Kitaev transformation isβ=11111111
01000000
001100000001000000001111000001000000001100000001
3Ä
ÇÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÅÉ
ÖÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑÑ
(99)
The Bravyi −Kitaev transformation, as presented here,
applies only for systems with a spin-orbital number equal toa power of two. A closely related variant of the Bravyi −Kitaev
transformation, known as the Bravyi−Kitaev tree method , also
achieves a mapping with O(log N)-weight creation and
annihilation operators.433The algorithm for generating this
mapping uses the data structure known as Fenwick trees, whichwere originally used for arithmetic coding compressionalgorithms.
434Although the scaling of operator weight is the
same as that of the standard Bravyi −Kitaev mapping, in
practice the Bravyi −Kitaev tree method produces higher-
weight creation and annihilation operators.379However, it has
been noted379that, in contrast to the standard Bravyi −Kitaev
mapping, the Bravyi −Kitaev tree method enables the use of
qubit-reduction techniques when the spin-orbital number isnot a power of 2.
Bravyi−Kitaev mapping allows for superfast simulation of
interacting fermion systems on a graph193where each node
corresponds to a local fermionic mode and each edgerepresents a pairwise interaction. Unlike Jordan −Wigner or
Fenwick tree-based methods which map mfermionic modes
(or nodes of the graph) to mqubits, the superfast simulation
schemes193,435map each edge of the graph to a qubit, yielding
O(md) qubits for a graph of degree d; i.e., each node on the
graph is connected to at most dother nodes. In the original
proposal by Kitaev,193one-body and two-body fermionic
interactions can be mapped to operators that act on at mostO(d) qubits. Recently this has been improved to O(log d)b y
Setia et al.435in connection with quantum error correction.
The authors also show that their encoding scheme is robustagainst single-qubit errors.
C. From Quantum Chemistry to Quantum Computation:
Example of Molecular Hydrogen
C.1. Introduction
The purpose of this Appendix is to present a detailed
description of the work ﬂow underlying a simple quantum
computation (VQE calculation) of a quantum chemistry
problem by working out the example of molecular hydrogen.Examples and resources for other small molecules are availableelsewhere.
67,436We will focus on a concrete problem and
progress step-by-step through the various assumptions,simpli ﬁcations, and calculations taken to convert the chemistry
problem into results on a quantum computer. This section isintended to speak to both quantum chemists and quantuminformation scientists and is structured as follows:
(a) de ﬁne the chemistry problem,
(b) map the problem onto the quantum computer,
(c) provide a brief introduction to (circuit-model) quantum
computation,
(d) apply the VQE algorithm to treat the problem.Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510899


--- PAGE 45 ---
C.2. De ﬁning the Chemistry Problem
We address the problem of determining the electronic ground-
state energy of molecular hydrogen as a function of thedistance between the nuclei. This relationship is otherwiseknown as the ground-state energy dissociation curve ( Figure
10). An accurate description of this energy surface is a key
challenge in quantum chemistry that can provide insight on a
range of chemical phenomena, e.g., bond breaking and reactiondynamics. To simplify the problem, we apply the BOA, inwhich we treat the nuclei as stationary classical particles. Thisis justi ﬁed as the ratio of electronic to nuclear mass is roughly
1:1000, leading to a separation in the time scale of theirdynamics. The resulting quantum Hamiltonian describing theelectronic system, in atomic units, can be written as
∑∑ ∑
∑=−∇
−|−|+|−|
+|−|>
>HZ ZZ
Rr RR
rr2
1ii ji
ij ij iij
ij
ij i ijr
elec2
,,
,i
(100)
where riare the position coordinates of the electrons, which
parametrically depend on the ﬁxed position coordinates of the
nuclei Ri, and Ziand Midenoting the nuclear charges and
masses, respectively. The electronic system, as written in theﬁrst-quantized picture in eq 100 , assumes an in ﬁnite-dimen-
sional Hilbert space. When applying quantum computation forchemistry, the Hamiltonian is instead often considered in thesecond-quantized formulation, in which the system can bedescribed approximately using a ﬁnite basis. For our example
of molecular hydrogen, we consider the minimal basis (STO-
6G). For a deeper review of basis sets, the reader should refer
toAppendix A . Within this framework, states are labeled by the
occupation of the orbitals, and the exchange symmetry of theparticles is naturally considered through the use of fermioniccreation and annihilation operators. The electronic Hamil-tonian can then be expressed in terms of these second-quantized operators as∑∑=+†† †H ha a h a a a a1
2pqpq p q
pqrspqrs p q r s
(101)
where apis an electron annihilation operator that removes an
electron from an orbital with label p. The weights of the
operators are given by the molecular integrals
∫ ∑ ϕϕ=*∇−|− |hx xZxRrd( )2()pq pr
ii
iq2i
kjjjjjjy
{zzzzzz
(102)
and
∫ϕϕϕ ϕ
=**
|−|hx xxx x x
rrdd() ()()()
pqrspq s r
1212 1 2
12 (103)
where we use xito denote the spatial and spin coordinates, i.e.,
xi=( ri,σi). In practice, several electronic structure packages
and codes have been developed and optimized for computingthese integrals. To prepare our quantum computation formolecular hydrogen, we use such classically pre-computedintegrals to prepare the second-quantized Hamiltonian.
C.3. Mapping the Problem
In classical computation, the chemistry problem is treated by
solving the necessary equations using a method that imple-
ments some level of approximations. In quantum computation,an extra “translation ”step is necessary to encode the second-
quantized Hamiltonian in a system of quantum bits, or qubits,prior to treating the problem. This is achieved by applying amapping from the set of creation and annihilation operators inthe Hamiltonian to the set of operators on qubits, in which themapping preserves the algebrai c relationships, i.e., the
fermionic canonical commutation relations. We note that thisstep is a general prerequisite for implementing Hamiltoniansimulations, the QPEA, or the VQE. In Appendix B , we review
the two most well-known mappings, the Jordan Wigner andthe Bravyi −Kitaev transformations.
For our molecular hydrogen example, we employ the
Bravyi−Kitaev transformation, mapping the minimal-basis
second-quantized Hamiltonian shown in eq 101 to a four-
qubit Hamiltonian:
μμ μ μ μ=+ + + + H IZ Z Z Z Zelec 01 1 22 33 412 (104)
μμμ μ+++ +ZZ ZZ X ZX Y ZY513 624 7123 812 3 (105)
μμ μ+++ ZZZ ZZZ ZZZ9123 10134 1123 4 (106)
μμ μ+++ XZ XZ YZ YZ ZZ ZZ12123 4 1312 3 4 14123 4 (107)
Here, Xj,Yj, and Zjare Pauli operators acting on the jth qubit,
such as X1=σx⊗I⊗I⊗I, and the μkare determined by the
integrals from eqs 102 and103. As described in O ’Malley et
al.,64symmetries in this Hamiltonian can be exploited to
construct a two-qubit Hamiltonian representing the symmetrysector of the original Hamiltonian that contains the groundstate. The resulting two-qubit Hamiltonian is
νν ν ν ν ν̃=+ + + + + H IZ Z Z Z X X Y Yelec 0 1 1 2 2 3 1 2 4 1 2 5 1 2
(108)
where the νjare linear combinations of the μk. This is the ﬁnal
form of the Hamiltonian we will use in our quantumcomputation to determine the ground-state energy as afunction of interatomic spacing.
Figure 10. Dissociation pro ﬁle of molecular hydrogen in the minimal
basis (STO-6G). The ground-state energies computed using the fullconﬁguration interaction (FCI) method are shown. The ideal goal in
applying the VQE algorithm for chemistry is to compute energies that
approximately reproduce the FCI results.Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510900


--- PAGE 46 ---
C.4. A Brief Introduction to Quantum Computation
After encoding the computational problem or task onto the
quantum computer, we can approach the said task (or parts ofthe overall task) on the quantum computer by manipulating its
qubits with relevant quantum operations. Before we describe
the application of the VQE, an algorithm that involves bothclassical and quantum computations, we brie ﬂy introduce the
workings of a quantum computation. The following paragraphsdescribe the widely used “circuit-model ”of quantum
computation. However, as described in the main text, othermodels such as adiabatic quantum computation exist.
Just as bits are the elementary units of a (classical)
computation, quantum bits or qubitsare the elementary
units of a quantum computation. Qubits are controllable, two-level quantum systems. Analogous to logic gates, whichcomprise, en masse , a computation, quantum gates are simple
actions or operations performed on qubits which, in sequence,comprise a quantum computation. Speci ﬁcally, a quantum gate
is a unitary transformation which typically manipulates just afew qubits at a time. As an example, a common single-qubitgate is a “Z-gate ”,o r “phase-gate ”, which maps the quantum
state |0⟩to itself and the state |1⟩to|−1
⟩. While this phase-gate
only changes the (unobservable) phase of these two states, itaﬀects a non-trivial action on superpositions of these states.
For example, the quantum state |+⟩=(|0⟩+|1⟩)/
2is
transformed to the orthogonal state vector Z(|0⟩+|1⟩)/2=
(|0⟩−|1⟩)/2=|−⟩. This transformation may be physically
realized by subjecting the two level system to a driving term
that is diagonal in the qubit basis, i.e., proportional to σz.A
qubit ﬂip between the 0 and 1 states, in turn, may be realized
by a drive along σx. Similarly, a two-qubit gate may be
implemented by inducing a direct or indirect coupling betweentwo qubits. A two-qubit gate is fully characterized by how ittransforms the four two-qubit basis states |00⟩,|01⟩,|10⟩, and |
11⟩.
In its simplest form, a quantum computation implements the
following three steps, as illustrated using a circuit diagram inFigure 11 :
1. initialize the qubits in the state |0⟩⊗...⊗|0⟩,
2. apply a sequence of quantum gates U|0...0 ⟩, and
3. measure to obtain either 0 or 1 for each qubit.These steps can be combined and manipulated at a higher
level to achieve more sophisticated tasks. Namely, the VQEalgorithm complements “quantum ”routines comprising
executions of quantum circuits with classical routines toestimate the ground-state energy of molecular systems. In thefollowing subsection, we will describe the VQE algorithm inthe context of ﬁnding the ground-state energy of molecular
hydrogen.
C.5. Variational Quantum Eigensolver for Quantum
Chemistry
As detailed in section 5.1 , the VQE is a hybrid quantum −
classical algorithm that estimates molecular properties, often
the ground-state energies, of quantum systems using thevariational principle. Consequently, a promising application ofVQE is quantum chemistry. At a high level, VQE allocatessubtasks between quantum and classical resources based on theinherent strengths and capabilities of each device. In thisframework, the role of the quantum computer is to prepare the
parametrized trial quantum state |ψ(θ⃗)⟩(also known as the
ansatz )a n d estimate the energy with respect to the
Hamiltonian. The ansatz is constructed by applying avariational circuit that is, a parametrized quantum circuit
U(θ⃗) with classical parameters θ⃗to an initial or reference
state |ϕ
0⟩. The role of the classical processor is then to
orchestrate the minimization of the energy expectation throughfeedback to the parameters θ⃗. Procedurally, the VQE algorithm
can be summarized in the following steps:
1. prepare the parametrized trial quantum state |ψ(θ⃗)⟩=
U(θ⃗)|ϕ
0⟩on the quantum computer [note: normal-
ization is assumed],
2. estimate the expectation value of energy ⟨ψ(θ⃗)|H|ψ(θ⃗)⟩
using measurements of terms in the Hamiltonian,
3. update the parameter(s) θ⃗of the quantum state using a
classical optimization routine, and
4. repeat the previous steps until convergence criteria (e.g.,
in energy and/or iteration number) are satis ﬁed.
Often the challenge in VQE is the choice and/or design of
the ansatz, which largely in ﬂuences the performance of the
algorithm.341This has motivated numerous studies and designs
of ansatzes, several of which are reviewed in section 5.1.1 . For
our case of simulating molecular hydrogen, we selected anansatz based on the unitary coupled cluster (UCC) method, asshown in Figure 12 . To construct the ansatz, the HF reference
state (i.e., |01⟩)i s ﬁrst prepared, followed by quantum
operations corresponding to the application of the UCCoperators. For more details on the UCC method, the readershould refer to section 5.1.1 . We note that, for the H
2example,
this level of theory is equivalent with the exact solution.
Once the ansatz is selected, its variational circuit
implementation is executed on the quantum computer tocompute the objective function value, which, in the case ofVQE, is the energy expectation. We note that initialization ofthe variational circuit parameters should ideally be informative.For instance, in the case of UCC ansatz, the classicallycomputed MP2 amplitudes can be used to initialize the VQE
parameters (i.e., UCC amplitudes). The energy expectation
can then be estimated using the Hamiltonian averaging
procedure. Given that the Hamiltonian is written as a sum ofPauli terms acting on subsets of qubits, we can compute theenergy expectation by averaging over the expectation values ofthe individual Pauli terms, as shown below:
Figure 11. Illustration of a quantum computation using the circuit
model. Various quantum and/or quantum −classical algorithms
leverage the capabilities of quantum circuits to achieve computational
tasks or subtasks.Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510901


--- PAGE 47 ---
∑⟨⟩= ⟨⟩ Hh O
iii
(109)
where Oiis a Pauli term, a tensor product of Pauli operators
(i.e., X,Y,Z,o rI) acting on some subset of qubits, and hiis the
corresponding weight.
In the case of molecular hydrogen, the energy expectation
expression becomes
νν ν ν ν
ν⟨⟩ = +⟨⟩ +⟨⟩ +⟨ ⟩ +⟨ ⟩
+⟨ ⟩HIZ Z Z Z X X
YY01 12 2 3 1 24 1 2
51 2 (110)
We note that when measuring each Pauli expectation, post-
rotations may need to be applied to make measurements in theZbasis. These measurements are then collected and processed
to approximate the total energy. In practice, we can only obtainaﬁnite number of measurements, leading to errors in the
energy estimation. For a deeper analysis of the sampling error,the reader should refer to section 5.1.2 or ref 63. While VQE is
a near-term alternative to the QPEA due to its low coherencetime requirements, the trade-o ﬀor cost of the algorithm is the
large number of measurements needed to approximate the
ground-state energy with high precision.
After computing the energy expectation with respect to
some values assigned to the parameters, VQE employs aclassical optimization routine to update the parameters toideally reach a quantum state that better approximates theground state. Section 5.1.3 reviews a number of optimizationroutines used and benchmarked for VQE in previous studies.
Provided that the ansatz can well describe the ground state andthe classical optimizer is robust against noise in the costfunction landscape, VQE can provide a high-quality estimationfor the ground-state energy. This is observed for our smallexample of molecular hydrogen, shown in Figure 13 a, in which
a simulation of the VQE algorithm was able to computeground-state energies along the energy surface that werenumerically equal to the corresponding FCI energy values.Note that we also show the sampling error at a particulargeometry in Figure 13 b.
Since it was ﬁrst presented in 2014, VQE has been widely
studied and improved from both theoretical and experimentalstandpoints. In particular, VQE was experimentally imple-mented for molecular systems beyond hydrogen, as highlightedinsection 5.1 , demonstrating the utility and potential of the
algorithm for applications in quantum chemistry even on earlyquantum computers.
AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
*E-mail: alan@aspuru.com .
ORCID
Matthias Degroote: 0000-0002-8850-7708
Nicolas P. D. Sawaya: 0000-0001-8510-8480
Libor Veis: 0000-0002-4229-6335
Alán Aspuru-Guzik: 0000-0002-8277-4434
Figure 12. Quantum circuit used in VQE to estimate the ground-state energy for molecular hydrogen in the minimal basis. After preparing the
parametrized quantum state, using the HF reference state followed by the application of the unitary coupled cluster-inspired variational circuit. To
estimate the energy expectation, necessary post-rotations ( Rt∈{RX(−π/2), RY(π/2), I}) are applied before measuring the qubits in the Zbasis.
Figure 13. VQE simulation results for molecular hydrogen in the minimal basis (STO-6G). (a) Dissociation pro ﬁle computed using the VQE
algorithm. At each bond length, the energy computed using VQE is numerically equal to that of the FCI method. The L-BFGS-B method was used
for parameter optimization. (b) Energy expectation plotted over a range of parameter values for bond length of 1.2 Å. A parameter scan using aﬁnite number of samples is overlaid with that generated using the wave function simulator. These simulations were implemented using
OpenFermion436and Forest.412Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510902


--- PAGE 48 ---
Notes
The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest.
Biographies
Yudong Cao is a quantum computing scientist and co-founder at
Zapata Computing, a quantum software startup company based in
Cambridge, MA. Previously he was a postdoctoral researcher at
Harvard University. He holds a Ph.D. in Computer Science from
Purdue University, for which his dissertation received the 2016
Chorafas award in Computer Science and Informatics. His researchareas include quantum algorithms and quantum complexity theory.
Jonathan Romero received a Ph.D. in Chemical Physics from Harvard
University, after earning B.S. and M.S. degrees in Chemistry from the
National University of Colombia. His research has focused on the
development of quantum algorithms for near-term quantum devices
for applications in quantum simulation and quantum machine
learning. He is a co-founder of Zapata Computing, where he worksas a research scientist.
Jonathan (Jonny) Olson received a Ph.D. in Physics from Louisiana
State University, after earning B.S. and M.S. degrees in Physics and
Mathematics from the University of Idaho. Following his Ph.D., he
was a postdoctoral researcher at Harvard University. His research has
focused on the development of methods to utilize near-term quantum
devices, including photonic devices, for quantum metrology and near-term quantum machine learning and variational algorithms. He is a
co-founder of Zapata Computing, where he works as a research
scientist.
Matthias Degroote obtained his Ph.D. in Physics from Ghent
University for his work on Green ’s functions at the Center for
Molecular Modeling. He did research on tensor network states in the
group of Prof. Frank Verstraete at Ghent University and studied
coupled cluster ansatzes for strong correlation under the guidance of
Prof. Gustavo E. Scuseria at Rice University. He joined the group of
Prof. Ala ́n Aspuru-Guzik at Harvard University and the University of
Toronto to do research on algorithm development for performing
quantum chemistry calculations on quantum computers.
Peter Johnson received his Ph.D. in Physics from Dartmouth College
in 2016. From 2016 to 2018, he did postdoctoral work in quantum
algorithms with the Aspuru-Guzik group in the Department of
Chemical and Chemical Biology at Harvard University. He then co-
founded Zapata Computing along with other researchers from the
Aspuru-Guzik group and currently works there as a research scientist
developing quantum algorithms and software.
Mária Kieferova ́is a Ph.D. student at Macquarie University and the
Institute of Quantum Computing at the University of Waterloo. She
obtained a M.Sc. in Theoretical Physics from Comenius University.
Her research focuses on quantum algorithms.
Ian D. Kivlichan is a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Physics at
Harvard University, supervised by Prof. Ala ́n Aspuru-Guzik. He
received his H.B.Sc. in Physics from the University of Toronto. His
Ph.D. research primarily focuses on developing quantum algorithms
for simulating quantum chemistry.
Tim Menke (born in Wolfsburg, Germany) is a Ph.D. candidate at the
Harvard University Physics Department and a visiting student at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He obtained his B.Sc. (2013)and M.Sc. (2015) degrees in Physics from ETH Zu ̈rich. Tim
completed his Master ’s thesis on microwave-to-optics transduction at
the University of Colorado Boulder. Under the supervision of Prof.
Alán Aspuru-Guzik and Prof. William Oliver, he currently investigates
the interplay of quantum and classical optimization. In particular, hestudies computational and exper imental aspects of non-local
interactions in superconducting ﬂux qubits.
Borja Peropadre is a senior scientist at Zapata Computing. From 2016
to 2018, he held a position at Raytheon, where he served as scientistin the Quantum Information group. Prior to that, Borja was apostdoctoral fellow at Harvard University in Prof. Aspuru-Guzik ’s
group from 2013 to 2016. Borja graduated in 2013.
Nicolas P. D. Sawaya received a Ph.D. in Chemical Physics and a M.A.
in Physics from Harvard University, after earning a B.S. in Chemistryand a B.S. in Mechanical Engineering from the University ofCalifornia, San Diego. He has published work on quantum algorithm
development, modeling of microscopic energy transfer, and other
topics. He is currently a research scientist at Intel Laboratories inCalifornia.
Sukin (Hannah) Sim is a Ph.D. student in the Department of
Chemistry and Chemical Biology at Harvard University under thesupervision of Prof. Ala ́n Aspuru-Guzik. She received her B.A. in
Chemical Physics from Wellesley College. Her Ph.D. research focuseson developing variational hybrid quantum −classical algorithms for
applications in quantum chemistry and machine learning.
Libor Veis is a scientist at the J. Heyrovsky Institute of Physical
Chemistry of the Czech Academy of Sciences. After receiving hisPh.D. degree in Physical Chemistry from the Charles University inPrague (Czech Republic, with Prof. Jiri Pittner) in 2012, he joined theWigner Research Centre for Physics in Budapest as a postdoctoralfellow (with Prof. Ors Legeza). His research interests focus ondevelopment of quantum algorithms for application in chemistry aswell as classical computational methods based on tensor networks.
Alán Aspuru-Guzik ’s research lies at the interface of chemistry,
computer science, and physics. He is a pioneer in the development ofquantum algorithms for the simulation of chemical systems onquantum computers. He has developed algorithms for molecularelectronic structure and dynamics, as well as lattice protein folding.He and his group introduced the Variational Quantum Eigensolver,an algorithm for molecular electronic structure on near-term quantumcomputers. He has developed quantum machine learning algorithmssuch as the quantum autoencoder. In addition to quantum computing,he works on the integration of robotics, machine learning and high-throughput quantum chemistry for the development of materialsacceleration platforms. These “self-driving laboratories ”
promise to
accelerate the rate of scienti ﬁc discovery, with applications to clean
energy and optoelectronic materials. He is jointly appointed as aProfessor of Chemistry and Computer Science at the University ofToronto. Previously, he was a full professor at Harvard University.Alán is also a co-founder of Zapata Computing and Kebotix, two
early-stage ventures in quantum computing and self-drivinglaboratories, respectively.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Dominic Berry, Joonsuk Huh, Artur
Izmaylov, Antonio Mezzacapo, and Thomas O ’Brien for the
careful reading of the manuscript and the helpful suggestions.A.A.-G. acknowledges support from the Army Research O ﬃce
under Award No. W911NF-15-1-0256 and the Vannevar Bush
Faculty Fellowship program sponsored by the Basic Research
Oﬃce of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and
Engineering (Award No. ONR 00014-16-1-2008). A.A.-G. alsoacknowledges generous support from Anders G. Froseth andfrom the Canada 150 Resear ch Chair Program. I.D.K.
acknowledges partial support from the National Sciences andEngineering Research Council of Canada. L.V. acknowledgesChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510903


--- PAGE 49 ---
support by the Czech Science Foundation (Grant No. 18-
18940Y). S.S. is supported by the DOE Computational ScienceGraduate Fellowship under grant no. DE-FG02-97ER25308.T.M. was supported by the O ﬃce of the Director of National
Intelligence (ODNI), Intelligence Advanced Research ProjectsActivity (IARPA), via U.S. Army Research O ﬃce Contract No.
W911NF-17-C-0050. M.D. acknowledges support by the U.S.Department of Energy, O ﬃce of Science, O ﬃce of Advanced
Scienti ﬁc Computing Research, Quantum Algorithms Teams
Program.
GLOSSARY
Section 2 Terms
H,Hi Hamiltonian and terms in the Hamiltonian,
respectively
cn,βj probability amplitudes
t time
|ψ⟩,ψ,ϕ quantum states
A,S,V arbitrary matrix, its similarity transform,
and its diagonalized form
θ⃗,θ⃗0 variational parameters
a,a†fermion annihilation and creation operators
r ⃗ electron coordinate position vector
R ⃗ njuclear coordinate position vector
hpq,hpqrs one- and two-body Hamiltonian elements
X,Y,Z,I Pauli matrices and identity
E energy
σi,j ith Pauli operator acting on the jth qubit
N particle number
U unitary operator
A tensor
n number of qubits
Ej,ψj eigenvalue and eigenvector of Hamiltonian
λj,φj complex eigenvalue of a unitary and its
phase
BOA Born −Oppenheimer approximation
QPEA quantum phase estimation algorithmVQA variational quantum algorithmAQC adiabatic quantum computingDFT density functional theoryGGA, meta-GGA generalized gradient approximationSCF self-consistent ﬁeld
FCI full con ﬁguration interaction
QMC quantum Monte CarloDMC di ﬀusion Monte Carlo
AFQMC auxiliary ﬁeld quantum Monte Carlo
ED exact diagonalizationQPE quantum phase estimationDMRG density matrix renormalization groupMPS matrix product stateMO molecular orbitalTNS tensor network stateTTNS tree tensor network stateMD molecular dynamics
TDVP time-dependent variational principle
MCTDH multi-con ﬁguration time-dependent hartree
NISQ noisy intermediate-scale quantumFTQC fault-tolerant quantum computingVQE variational quantum eigensolver
Section 3 Terms
q ⃗,q ⃗′ initial and ﬁnal normal coordinates
UDus Duschinsky rotationR̂U rotation corresponding to UDus
UDok Doktorov rotation
d ⃗ displacement vector
a,a†bosonic annihilation and creation operators
D̂δ displacement operator
ŜΩ squeezing operator
m eigenmode corresponding to photon transitions
mk phonon con ﬁguration
ω distribution of vibronic transition amplitudes
ωvib allowed energy transitions
N number of atoms in a molecule
M number of vibrionic modes in an N-atom molecule
FCP( ω) Franck −Condon pro ﬁle distribution
perm( ·) matrix permanent
δ(·) Dirac delta function
Sn symmetric group of nelements
σ permutation of Sn
sgn(·) sign, or parity, of a permutation (equal to +1 if even,
and−1 otherwise)
M an arbitrary matrix
n dimension of M
mi,j i,jth entry of the matrix M
NP non-deterministic polynomial time (complexity
class)
P deterministic polynomial time (complexity class)
#P sharp-P (complexity class)
BQP bounded-probability quantum polynomial (com-
plexity class)
QMA quantum Merlin-Arthur (complexity class)
#BQP sharp-BQP (complexity class)
2RDM two-electron-reduced density matricesHF Hartree −Fock
TD-DFT time-dependent density functional theoryFCP Franck −Condon pro ﬁle
Section 4 Terms
N number of quantum systems, number of qubits,
number of orbitals
O(·) big-O notation
H Hamiltonian
e−iHtHamiltonian evolution
U(t) unitary dynamics
S number of k-body interactions
k support size of largest Hamiltonian term
τ ||H||t
ϵ error
poly( ·) polynomial function of order ·
d sparsity of Hamiltonian
η number of particles in system
λm eigenenergy
T number of ancillary qubits
|ψm⟩ eigenstate
|ϕ⟩ state prepared for phase estimation
f oracular function
f invertible function used in generalization of PEA in
section 4.1.2,
Rk rotation gate
n number of qubits
C cost of implementing a primitive for e−if(H)t
||·|| spectral norm
g(ϵ) number of repetitions of C
LCU linear combination of unitary operatorsQPEA quantum phase estimation algorithmChemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510904


--- PAGE 50 ---
RAM random access memory
IPEA iterative phase estimation algorithmASP adiabatic state preparationMCSCF multi-con ﬁgurational self-consistent ﬁeld
QFT quantum Fourier transform
Section 5 Terms
Var(X) variance of X
Cov( X,Y) covariance between XandY
N number of spin orbitals, number of qubits
η number of electrons
|Ψ(θ⃗)⟩ variational state
U(θ⃗) variational unitary
H Hamiltonian
|Ψ0⟩ reference state
T cluster operator
O observable
S number of steps in Hamiltonian variational ansatz
t time
ap†,ap fermionic second quantization operators in canon-
ical basis
cp†,cp fermionic second quantization operators in
alternative basis
bp†,bp Bogoliubov second quantization operators
γp†,γp Majorana second quantization operators
M number of terms in the Hamiltonian
Γ covariance matrix for fermionic Gaussian state
< rotation matrix
C constant
Rj rotation matrix
UBog Bogoliubov transformation
L number of layers in LDCA ansatz
Tij coeﬃcient for kinetic term in Hamiltonian
Uij coeﬃcient for potential term in Hamiltonian
Vij coeﬃcient for interaction term in Hamiltonian
X,Y,Z,IPauli operators
σx,σy,σz,IPauli operators
O(·) Big-O notation
O observable
σi precision of expectation value of Oi
NISQ noisy intermediate-scale quantum
HQC hybrid quantum −classical
VQE variational quantum eigensolverVQC variational quantum −classical
VQS variational quantum simulationQAE quantum autoencoderCUSP compressed unsupervised state preparationPEA phase estimation algorithmPMA physically motivated ansatzHHA hardware heuristic ansatzHEA hardware e ﬃcient ansatz (a speci ﬁc kind of HHA)
CC coupled clusterUCC unitary coupled clusterUCCSD unitary coupled cluster singles and doublesLDCA low-depth circuit ansatzFGS fermionic Gaussian stateBCH Baker −Campbell −Hausdor ﬀ
ASP adiabatic state preparationFSN fermionic swap networkBCS Bardeen −Cooper −Schrie ﬀer
HF Hartree −Fock
Appendix Terms
l angular momentum quantum numberm magnetic quantum number
Rlm(r)a product of Laguerre polynomials and a term
decaying exponentially with r
Helec electronic Hamiltonian
ri position coordinates of electrons
Ri ﬁxed position coordinates of nuclei
Ψi basis wave functions
σi spin degree of freedom for electrons
ϕi,j molecular orbitals
Yl,m spherical harmonic with orbital angular momentum
quantum numbers l,m
ai,ai†fermionic annihilation and creation operator on
orbital ϕi
|vac⟩ fermionic vacuum state
Zi ith nuclear charge ( eqs106,,−108,)
σz Pauli Zmatrix
σ+(σx+iσy)/2
n a positive integer
I identity operator
Xj,Yj,ZjPauli X,Y, and Zoperators acting on the jth qubit
(eq110,,)
μi coeﬃcients of electronic Hamiltonian terms
H̃elec two-qubit electronic Hamiltonian (symmetry sector
of the original Hamiltonian)
νi coeﬃcients of 2-qubit electronic Hamiltonian terms;
linear combinations of μi
U a unitary operator
Ψ′(t ⃗) ansatz state
U unitary operation
|ψ(t ⃗)⟩ ansatz state
U(t ⃗) variational quantum circuit
|ϕ0⟩ initial/reference quantum state
Oi a tensor product of Pauli operators
hi weight of Pauli operator corresponding to Oi
VQE variational quantum eigensolver
HF Hartree −Fock
UCC unitary coupled clusterSPSA simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximationPSO particle swarm optimizationSTO Slater-type orbitalsGTO Gaussian-type orbitalsPW plane-wave
REFERENCES
(1) Nielsen, M. A.; Chuang, I. L. Quantum Computation and
Quantum Information ; Cambridge University Press, 2010.
(2) Divincenzo, D. P. Scalable Quantum Computers ; Wiley-VCH
Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 2005; pp 1 −13.
(3) Brown, K. R.; Kim, J.; Monroe, C. Co-Designing a Scalable
Quantum Computer With Trapped Atomic Ions. npj Quantum Inf.
2016 ,2, 34.
(4) Monroe, C.; Kim, J. Scaling the Ion Trap Quantum Processor.
Science 2013 ,339, 1164−1169.
(5) Blatt, R.; Wineland, D. Entangled States of Trapped Atomic
Ions. Nature 2008 ,453, 1008−1015.
(6) Wineland, D.; Monroe, C.; Itano, W.; King, B.; Leibfried, D.;
Meekhof, D.; Myatt, C.; Wood, C. Quantum Computing ; Wiley-VCH
Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 2004; pp 57 −84.
(7) Steane, A. The Ion Trap Quantum Information Processor. Appl.
Phys. B: Lasers Opt. 1997 ,64, 623−643.
(8) Devoret, M. H.; Martinis, J. M. Experimental Aspects of Quantum
Computing ; Springer US, 2005; pp 163 −203.
(9) Devoret, M. H.; Wallra ﬀ, A.; Martinis, J. M. Superconducting
Qubits: A Short Review. 2004, arXiv:cond-mat/0411174 [cond-
mat.mes-hall]; https://arxiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0411174 .Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510905


--- PAGE 51 ---
(10) Wendin, G. Quantum Information Processing With Super-
conducting Circuits: A Review. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2017 ,80, 106001.
(11) Gambetta, J. M.; Chow, J. M.; Steffen, M. Building Logical
Qubits in a Superconducting Quantum Computing System. npj
Quantum Inf. 2017 ,3,2 .
(12) Devoret, M. H.; Schoelkopf, R. J. Superconducting Circuits for
Quantum Information: An Outlook. Science 2013 ,339, 1169−1174.
(13) Kok, P.; Munro, W. J.; Nemoto, K.; Ralph, T. C.; Dowling, J.
P.; Milburn, G. J. Linear Optical Quantum Computing With Photonic
Qubits. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2007 ,79, 135−174.
(14) Adami, C.; Cerf, N. J. In Quantum Computing and Quantum
Communications ; Williams, C. P., Ed.; Springer: Berlin, Heidelberg,
1999; pp 391 −401.
(15) Krovi, H. Models of Optical Quantum Computing. Nano-
photonics 2017 ,6, 531−541.
(16) O ’Brien, J. L. Optical Quantum Computing. Science 2007 ,318,
1567−1570.
(17) Doherty, M. W.; Manson, N. B.; Delaney, P.; Jelezko, F.;
Wrachtrup, J.; Hollenberg, L. C. The Nitrogen-Vacancy ColourCentre in Diamond. Phys. Rep. 2013 ,528,1−45.
(18) Childress, L.; Hanson, R. Diamond NV Centers for Quantum
Computing and Quantum Networks. MRS Bull. 2013 ,38, 134−138.
(19) Gordon, L.; Weber, J. R.; Varley, J. B.; Janotti, A.; Awschalom,
D. D.; de Walle, C. G. V. Quantum Computing With Defects. MRS
Bull. 2013 ,38, 802−807.
(20) Jones, J. A. In Quantum Computing and Communications ;
Brooks, M., Ed.; Springer: London, 1999; pp 71 −78.
(21) Oliveira, I. S.; Bonagamba, T. J.; Sarthour, R. S.; Freitas, J. C.;
deAzevedo, E. R. In NMR Quantum Information Processing ; Oliveira, I.
S., Bonagamba, T. J., Sarthour, R. S., Freitas, J. C., deAzevedo, E. R.,Eds.; Elsevier Science: Amsterdam, 2007; pp 137 −
181.
(22) Ramanathan, C.; Boulant, N.; Chen, Z.; Cory, D. G.; Chuang,
I.; Ste ﬀen, M. In Experimental Aspects of Quantum Computing ; Everitt,
H. O., Ed.; Springer US: Boston, MA, 2005; pp 15 −44.
(23) Nayak, C.; Simon, S. H.; Stern, A.; Freedman, M.; Sarma, S. D.
Non-Abelian Anyons and Topological Quantum Computation. Rev.
Mod. Phys. 2008 ,80, 1083−1159.
(24) Lahtinen, V.; Pachos, J. A Short Introduction to Topological
Quantum Computation. SciPost Phys. 2017 ,3, 021.
(25) Bernien, H.; Schwartz, S.; Keesling, A.; Levine, H.; Omran, A.;
Pichler, H.; Choi, S.; Zibrov, A. S.; Endres, M.; Greiner, M.; Vuletic ́,
V.; Lukin, M. D. Probing Many-Body Dynamics on a 51-AtomQuantum Simulator. Nature 2017 ,551, 579.
(26) Xia, T.; Lichtman, M.; Maller, K.; Carr, A. W.; Piotrowicz, M.
J.; Isenhower, L.; Saffman, M. Randomized Benchmarking of Single-Qubit Gates in a 2D Array of Neutral-Atom Qubits. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2015 ,114, 100503.
(27) Wang, Y.; Kumar, A.; Wu, T.-Y.; Weiss, D. S. Single-Qubit
Gates Based on Targeted Phase Shifts in a 3D Neutral Atom Array.Science 2016 ,352, 1562−1565.
(28) Lienhard, V.; de Le ́séleuc, S.; Barredo, D.; Lahaye, T.;
Browaeys, A.; Schuler, M.; Henry, L.-P.; La ̈uchli, A. M. Observing the
Space- And Time-Dependent Growth of Correlations in Dynamically
Tuned Synthetic Ising Models With Antiferromagnetic Interactions.
Phys. Rev. X 2018 ,8, No. 021070.
(29) Saffman, M. Quantum Computing With Neutral Atoms.
National Science Review 2019 ,6,2 4−25.
(30) Loss, D.; DiVincenzo, D. P. Quantum Computation With
Quantum Dots. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 1998 ,57, 120−126.
(31) Imamoglu, A.; Awschalom, D. D.; Burkard, G.; DiVincenzo, D.
P.; Loss, D.; Sherwin, M.; Small, A. Quantum Information ProcessingUsing Quantum Dot Spins and Cavity QED. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1999 ,83,
4204−4207.
(32) Mi, X.; Benito, M.; Putz, S.; Zajac, D. M.; Taylor, J. M.;
Burkard, G.; Petta, J. R. A Coherent Spin-Photon Interface in Silicon.
Nature 2018 ,555, 599
−603.
(33) Samkharadze, N.; Zheng, G.; Kalhor, N.; Brousse, D.; Sammak,
A.; Mendes, U. C.; Blais, A.; Scappucci, G.; Vandersypen, L. M. K.Strong Spin-Photon Coupling in Silicon. Science 2018 ,359, 1123−
1127.
(34) Blatt, R.; Ha ﬀner, H.; Roos, C. F.; Becher, C.; Schmidt-Kaler, F.
Experimental Aspects of Quantum Computing ; Springer US, 2015; pp
61−73.
(35) Shor, P. W. Polynomial Time Algorithms for Discrete
Logarithms and Factoring on a Quantum Computer. Algorithmic
Number Theory ; Springer: Berlin, Heidelberg, 1994; pp 289 −289.
(36) Bernstein, E.; Vazirani, U. Quantum Complexity Theory.
Proceedings of the Twenty Fifth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory ofComputing ; New York, 1993; pp 11 −20.
(37) Deutsch, D.; Jozsa, R. Rapid Solution of Problems by Quantum
Computation. Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 1992 ,439, 553−558.
(38) Grover, L. K. A Fast Quantum Mechanical Algorithm for
Database Search. Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Annual ACM
Symposium on Theory of Computing ; New York, 1996; pp 212 −219.
(39) Simon, D. On the Power of Quantum Computation.
Proceedings of the 35th Annual Symposium on Foundations of ComputerScience , 1994.
(40) Abrams, D. S.; Lloyd, S. Quantum Algorithm Providing
Exponential Speed Increase for Finding Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors.Phys. Rev. Lett. 1999 ,83, 5162−5165.
(41) Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Dutoi, A.; Love, P. J.; Head-Gordon, M.
Simulated Quantum Computation of Molecular Energies. Science
2005 ,309, 1704−1707.
(42) Wang, H.; Kais, S.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Hoffmann, M. R.
Quantum Algorithm for Obtaining the Energy Spectrum of MolecularSystems. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2008 ,10, 5388.
(43) Lidar, D. A.; Wang, H. Calculating the Thermal Rate Constant
With Exponential Speedup on a Quantum Computer. Phys. Rev. E:
Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top. 1999 ,59, 2429−
2438.
(44) Monz, T.; Schindler, P.; Barreiro, J. T.; Chwalla, M.; Nigg, D.;
Coish, W. A.; Harlander, M.; Ha ̈nsel, W.; Hennrich, M.; Blatt, R. 14-
Qubit Entanglement: Creation and Coherence. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011 ,
106, 130506.
(45) Mohseni, M.; Read, P.; Neven, H.; Boixo, S.; Denchev, V.;
Babbush, R.; Fowler, A.; Smelyanskiy, V.; Martinis, J. CommercializeQuantum Technologies in Five Years. Nature 2017 ,
543, 171−174.
(46) Manin, Y. Computable and Uncomputable ; Sovetskoye Radio:
Moscow, 1980.
(47) Feynman, R. P. Simulating Physics With Computers. Int. J.
Theor. Phys. 1982 ,21, 467−488.
(48) Benioff, P. The Computer as a Physical System: A Microscopic
Quantum Mechanical Hamiltonian Model of Computers asRepresented by Turing Machines. J. Stat. Phys. 1980 ,22, 563−591.
(49) Deutsch, D. Quantum Theory the Church-Turing Principle and
the Universal Quantum Computer. Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 1985 ,
400,9 7−117.
(50) Lloyd, S. Universal Quantum Simulators. Science 1996 ,273,
1073−1078.
(51) Childs, A. M.; van Dam, W. Quantum Algorithms for Algebraic
Problems. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2010 ,82,1−52.
(52) Wiesner, S. Simulations of Many-Body Quantum Systems by a
Quantum Computer. 1996, arXiv:quant-ph/9603028; https://arxiv.
org/abs/quant-ph/9603028 .
(53) Zalka, C. Efficient Simulation of Quantum Systems by
Quantum Computers. Fortschr. Phys. 1998 ,46, 877−879.
(54) Kitaev, A.; Shen, A.; Vyalyi, M. Classical and Quantum
Computation ; American Mathematical Society: Providence, RI, 2002.
(55) Ortiz, G.; Gubernatis, J. E.; Knill, E.; Laflamme, R. Quantum
Algorithms for Fermionic Simulations. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt.
Phys. 2001 ,64, 022319.
(56) Wecker, D.; Bauer, B.; Clark, B. K.; Hastings, M. B.; Troyer, M.
Gate-Count Estimates for Performing Quantum Chemistry on SmallQuantum Computers. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 2014 ,90,
022305.Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510906


--- PAGE 52 ---
(57) Hastings, M. B.; Wecker, D.; Bauer, B.; Troyer, M. Improving
Quantum Algorithms for Quantum Chemistry. Quantum Inf. Comput.
2015 ,15,1−21.
(58) Poulin, D.; Hastings, M. B.; Wecker, D.; Wiebe, N.; Doberty, A.
C.; Troyer, M. The Trotter Step Size Required for Accurate Quantum
Simulation of Quantum Chemistry. Quantum Inf. Comput. 2014 ,15,
361−384.
(59) Babbush, R.; McClean, J.; Wecker, D.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.;
Wiebe, N. Chemical Basis of Trotter −Suzuki Errors in Quantum
Chemistry Simulation. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 2015 ,91,
022311.
(60) Preskill, J. Quantum Computing in the NISQ Era and Beyond.
2018, arXiv:1801.00862 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.o rg/abs/1801.
00862 .
(61) Peruzzo, A.; McClean, J.; Shadbolt, P.; Yung, M.-H.; Zhou, X.-
Q.; Love, P. J.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; O ’Brien, J. L. A Variational
Eigenvalue Solver on a Photonic Quantum Processor. Nat. Commun.
2014 ,5, 4213.
(62) Wecker, D.; Hastings, M. B.; Troyer, M. Progress Towards
Practical Quantum Variational Algorithms. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt.
Phys. 2015 ,92, 042303.
(63) McClean, J. R.; Romero, J.; Babbush, R.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. The
Theory of Variational Hybrid Quantum-Classical Algorithms. New J.
Phys. 2016 ,18, No. 023023.
(64) O ’Malley, P. J. J.; et al. Scalable Quantum Simulation of
Molecular Energies. Phys. Rev. X 2016 ,6, No. 031007.
(65) Colless, J.; Ramasesh, V.; Dahlen, D.; Blok, M.; McClean, J.;
Carter, J.; de Jong, W. A.; Siddiqi, I. Implementing a Variational
Quantum Eigensolver Using Superconducting Qubits. Quantum
Information and Measurement 2017 , 2017; p QF6A.2.
(66) Li, Y.; Benjamin, S. C. Efficient Variational Quantum Simulator
Incorporating Active Error Minimization. Phys. Rev. X 2017 ,7,
No. 021050.
(67) Kandala, A.; Mezzacapo, A.; Temme, K.; Takita, M.; Brink, M.;
C h o w ,J .M . ;G a m b e t t a ,J .M .H a r d w a r e - E f f i c i e n tV a r i a t i o n a l
Quantum Eigensolver for Small Molecules and Quantum Magnets.
Nature 2017 ,549, 242−246.
(68) Colless, J. I.; Ramasesh, V. V.; Dahlen, D.; Blok, M. S.; Kimchi-
Schwartz, M. E.; McClean, J. R.; Carter, J.; de Jong, W. A.; Siddiqi, I.
Computation of Molecular Spectra on a Quantum Processor With anError-Resilient Algorithm. Phys. Rev. X 2018
,8, No. 011021.
(69) Dumitrescu, E. F.; McCaskey, A. J.; Hagen, G.; Jansen, G. R.;
Morris, T. D.; Papenbrock, T.; Pooser, R. C.; Dean, D. J.; Lougovski,
P. Cloud Quantum Computing of an Atomic Nucleus. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2018 ,120, 210501.
(70) Shen, Y.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, S.; Zhang, J.-N.; Yung, M.-H.; Kim,
K. Quantum Implementation of the Unitary Coupled Cluster for
Simulating Molecular Electronic Structure. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt.
Phys. 2017 ,95, 020501.
(71) Wang, Y.; Dolde, F.; Biamonte, J.; Babbush, R.; Bergholm, V.;
Yang, S.; Jakobi, I.; Neumann, P.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Whitfield, J. D.;
Wrachtrup, J. Quantum Simulation of Helium Hydride Cation in a
Solid-State Spin Register. ACS Nano 2015 ,9, 7769−7774.
(72) Hempel, C.; Maier, C.; Romero, J.; McClean, J.; Monz, T.;
Shen, H.; Jurcevic, P.; Lanyon, B. P.; Love, P.; Babbush, R.; Aspuru-
Guzik, A.; Blatt, R.; Roos, C. F. Quantum Chemistry Calculations on
a Trapped-Ion Quantum Simulator. Phys. Rev. X 2018 ,8, No. 031022.
(73) Farhi, E.; Goldstone, J.; Gutmann, S.; Sipser, M. Quantum
Computation by Adiabatic Evolution. 2000, arXiv:quant-ph/0001106;
https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0001106 .
(74) Albash, T.; Lidar, D. A. Adiabatic Quantum Computation. Rev.
Mod. Phys. 2018 ,90, 015002.
(75) Aharonov, D.; van Dam, W.; Kempe, J.; Landau, Z.; Lloyd, S.;
Regev, O. Adiabatic Quantum Computation Is Equivalent to StandardQuantum Computation. 45th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations
of Computer Science , 2004.
(76) Aaronson, S.; Arkhipov, A. The Computational Complexity of
Linear Optics. Proceedings of the Forty-Third Annual ACM Symposium
on Theory of Computing , New York, 2011; pp 333 −342.(77) Arkhipov, A.; Aaronson, S. The Computational Complexity of
Linear Optics. Quantum Information and Measurement 2014 , Messe:
Berlin, 2014.
(78) Schuch, N.; Verstraete, F. Computational Complexity of
Interacting Electrons and Fundamental Limitations of Density
Functional theory. Nat. Phys. 2009 ,5, 732−735.
(79) Liu, Y.-K.; Christandl, M.; Verstraete, F. Quantum Computa-
tional Complexity of the N-Representability Problem: QMA
Complete. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007 ,98, 110503.
(80) Brown, B.; Flammia, S. T.; Schuch, N. Computational Difficulty
of Computing the Density of States. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011 ,107,
040501.
(81) Whitfield, J. D.; Love, P. J.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Computational
Complexity in Electronic Structure. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2013 ,15,
397−411.
(82) Kohn, W. Nobel Lecture: Electronic Structure of Matter wave
Functions and Density Functionals. Rev. Mod. Phys. 1999 ,71, 1253−
1266.
(83) Markland, T. E.; Ceriotti, M. Nuclear Quantum Effects Enter
the Mainstream. Nat. Rev. Chem. 2018 ,2, 0109.
(84) Bubin, S.; Pavanello, M.; Tung, W.-C.; Sharkey, K.;
Adamowicz, L. Born −Oppenheimer and Non-Born −Oppenheimer,
Atomic and Molecular Calculations With Explicitly CorrelatedGaussians. Chem. Rev. 2013 ,113,3 6−79.
(85) Nakai, H. Nuclear Orbital Plus Molecular Orbital Theory:
Simultaneous Determina tion of Nuclear and Electronic Wave
Functions Without Born −Oppenheimer Approximation. Int. J.
Quantum Chem. 2007 ,107, 2849.
(86) Ishimoto, T.; Tachikawa, M.; Nagashima, U. Review of
Multicomponent Molecular Orbital Method for Direct Treatment of
Nuclear Quantum Effect. Int. J. Quantum Chem. 2009 ,109, 2677.
(87) Veis, L.; Vis ̌ňák, J.; Nishizawa, H.; Nakai, H.; Pittner, J.
Quantum Chemistry Beyond Born −Oppenheimer Approximation on
a Quantum Computer: A Simulated Phase Estimation Study. Int. J.
Quantum Chem. 2016 ,116, 1328−1336.
(88) Kassal, I.; Jordan, S. P.; Love, P. J.; Mohseni, M.; Aspuru-Guzik,
A. Polynomial-Time Quantum Algorithm for the Simulation of
Chemical Dynamics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2008 ,105, 18681 −
18686.
(89) Kivlichan, I. D.; Wiebe, N.; Babbush, R.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.
Bounding the Costs of Quantum Simulation of Many-Body Physics in
Real Space. J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 2017 ,50, 305301.
(90) Hohenberg, P.; Kohn, W. Inhomogeneous Electron Gas. Phys.
Rev.1964 ,136, B864−B871.
(91) Kohn, W.; Sham, L. J. Self-Consistent Equations Including
Exchange and Correlation Effects. Phys. Rev. 1965 ,140, A1133 −
A1138.
(92) Helgaker, T.; Jørgensen, P.; Olsen, J. Molecular Electronic-
Structure Theory ; John Wiley & Sons Ltd.: Hoboken, NJ, 2000.
(93) Fan, P.-D.; Piecuch, P. In The Usefulness of Exponential Wave
Function Expansions Employing One- And Two-Body Cluster Operators
in Electronic Structure Theory: The Extended and Generalized Coupled-
Cluster Methods ; Sabin, J., Bra ̈ndas, E., Eds.; Advances in Quantum
Chemistry; Academic Press, 2006; Vol. 51,p p1−57.
(94) Bulik, I. W.; Henderson, T. M.; Scuseria, G. E. Can Single-
Reference Coupled Cluster Theory Describe Static Correlation? J.
Chem. Theory Comput. 2015 ,11, 3171−3179.
(95) Kowalski, K.; Piecuch, P. The Method of Moments of Coupled-
Cluster Equations and the Renormalized CCSD[T], CCSD(T),CCSD(TQ), and CCSDT(Q) Approaches. J. Chem. Phys. 2000 ,113,
18−35.
(96) Degroote, M.; Henderson, T. M.; Zhao, J.; Dukelsky, J.;
Scuseria, G. E. Polynomial Similarity Transformation Theory: A
Smooth Interpolation Between Coupled Cluster Doubles and
Projected BCS Applied to the Reduced BCS Hamiltonian. Phys.
Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2016 ,93, 125124.
( 9 7 )P a l ,S . ;P r a s a d ,M .D . ;M u k h e r j e e ,D .O nC e r t a i n
Correspondences Among Various Coupled-Cluster Theories forClosed-Shell Systems. Pramana 1982 ,18, 261−270.Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510907


--- PAGE 53 ---
(98) Cooper, B.; Knowles, P. J. Benchmark Studies of Variational
Unitary and Extended Coupled Cluster Methods. J. Chem. Phys. 2010 ,
133, 234102.
(99) Van Voorhis, T.; Head-Gordon, M. Benchmark Variational
Coupled Cluster Doubles Results. J. Chem. Phys. 2000 ,113, 8873−
8879.
(100) Evangelista, F. A. Alternative Single-Reference Coupled
Cluster Approaches for Multireference Problems: The Simpler the
Better. J. Chem. Phys. 2011 ,134, 224102.
(101) Harsha, G.; Shiozaki, T.; Scuseria, G. E. On the Difference
Between Variational and Unitary Coupled Cluster Theories. J. Chem.
Phys. 2018 ,148, No. 044107.
(102) Taube, A. G.; Bartlett, R. J. New Perspectives on Unitary
Coupled-Cluster Theory. Int. J. Quantum Chem. 2006 ,106, 3393−
3401.
(103) Nooijen, M. Can the Eigenstates of a Many-Body Hamiltonian
Be Represented Exactly Using a General Two-Body Cluster
Expansion? Phys. Rev. Lett. 2000 ,84, 2108−2111.
(104) Heinrich, S. From Monte Carlo to Quantum Computation.
Math Comput. Simul. 2003 ,62, 219−230.
(105) Sherrill, C. D.; Schaefer, H. F. In The Con ﬁguration Interaction
Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches ; Advances in
Quantum Chemistry; Academic Press, 1999; pp 143 −269.
(106) Knowles, P. J.; Handy, N. C. Unlimited Full Configuration
Interaction Calculations. J. Chem. Phys. 1989 ,91, 2396−2398.
(107) Thøgersen, L.; Olsen, J. A Coupled Cluster and Full
Configuration Interaction Study of CN and CN. Chem. Phys. Lett.
2004 ,393,3 6−43.
(108) Ansaloni, R.; Bendazzoli, G. L.; Evangelisti, S.; Rossi, E. A
Parallel Full-Ci Algorithm. Comput. Phys. Commun. 2000 ,128, 496−
515.
(109) Rolik, Z.; Szabados, A ́.; Surja ́n, P. R. A Sparse Matrix Based
Full-Configuration Interaction Algorithm. J. Chem. Phys. 2008 ,128,
144101.
(110) Rossi, E.; Bendazzoli, G. L.; Evangelisti, S. Full Configuration
Interaction Algorithm on a Massively Parallel Architecture: Direct-
List Implementation. J. Comput. Chem. 1998 ,19, 658−672.
(111) Harrison, R.; Stahlberg, E. Massively Parallel Full Con ﬁg-
uration Interaction. Bench mark Electronic Structure Calculations on
the Intel Touchstone Delta. In High Performance Computing and Its
Applications in The Physical Sciences ; Browne, D. A., et al., Eds.; World
Scienti ﬁc, 1994.
(112) Abrams, D. S.; Lloyd, S. Simulation of Many-Body Fermi
Systems on a Universal Quantum Computer. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1997 ,79,
2586−2589.
(113) Szalay, S.; Pfeffer, M.; Murg, V.; Barcza, G.; Verstraete, F.;
Schneider, R.; Legeza, O. Tensor Product Methods and Entanglement
Optimization for Ab Initio Quantum Chemistry. Int. J. Quantum
Chem. 2015 ,115, 1342−1391.
(114) White, S. R. Density Matrix Formulation for Quantum
Renormalization Groups. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1992 ,69, 2863−2866.
(115) White, S. R. Density-Matrix Algorithms for Quantum
Renormalization Groups. Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys.
1993 ,48, 10345 −10356.
(116) White, S. R.; Martin, R. L. Ab Initio Quantum Chemistry
Using the Density Matrix Renormalization Group. J. Chem. Phys.
1999 ,110, 4127−4130.
(117) Chan, G. K.-L.; Head-Gordon, M. Highly Correlated
Calculations With a Polynomial Cost Algorithm: A Study of the
Density Matrix Renormalization Group. J. Chem. Phys. 2002 ,116,
4462−4476.
(118) Legeza, O.; Ro ̈der, J.; Hess, B. A. Controlling the Accuracy of
the Density-Matrix Renormalization-Group Method: The Dynamical
Block State Selection Approach. Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater.
Phys. 2003 ,67, 125114.
(119) Chan, G. K.-L.; Sharma, S. The Density Matrix Renormaliza-
tion Group in Quantum Chemistry. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2011 ,62,
465−481.(120) Wouters, S.; Van Neck, D. The Density Matrix Renormaliza-
tion Group for Ab Initio Quantum Chemistry. Eur. Phys. J. D 2014 ,
68, 272.
(121) Yanai, T.; Kurashige, Y.; Mizukami, W.; Chalupsky ́, J.; Lan, T.
N.; Saitow, M. Density Matrix Renormalization Group for Ab Initio
Calculations and Associated Dynamic Correlation Methods: A Review
of Theory and Applications. Int. J. Quantum Chem. 2015 ,115, 283−
299.
(122) Marti, K. H.; Reiher, M. The Density Matrix Renormalization
Group Algorithm in Quantum Chemistry. Z. Phys. Chem. 2010 ,224,
583−599.
(123) Schollwo ̈ck, U. The Density-Matrix Renormalization Group in
the Age of Matrix Product States. Ann. Phys. 2011 ,326,9 6−192.
(124) Eisert, J.; Cramer, M.; Plenio, M. B. Colloquium: Area Laws
for the Entanglement Entropy. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2010 ,82, 277−306.
(125) Moritz, G.; Hess, B. A.; Reiher, M. Convergence Behavior of
the Density-Matrix Renormalization Group Algorithm for Optimized
Orbital Orderings. J. Chem. Phys. 2005 ,122, No. 024107.
(126) Barcza, G.; Legeza, O.; Marti, K. H.; Reiher, M. Quantum-
Information Analysis of Electronic States of Different Molecular
Structures. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 2011 ,83, 012508.
(127) Krumnow, C.; Veis, L.; Legeza, O.; Eisert, J. Fermionic Orbital
Optimization in Tensor Network States. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2016 ,117,
210402.
(128) Olivares-Amaya, R.; Hu, W.; Nakatani, N.; Sharma, S.; Yang,
J.; Chan, G. K.-L. The Ab-Initio Density Matrix Renormalization
Group in Practice. J. Chem. Phys. 2015 ,142, No. 034102.
(129) Olsen, J. The CASSCF Method: A Perspective and
Commentary. Int. J. Quantum Chem. 2011 ,111, 3267−3272.
(130) Chan, G. K.-L.; Ka ́llay, M.; Gauss, J. State-Of-The-Art Density
Matrix Renormalization Group and Coupled Cluster Theory Studies
of the Nitrogen Binding Curve. J. Chem. Phys. 2004 ,121, 6110−6116.
(131) Hachmann, J.; Cardoen, W.; Chan, G. K.-L. Multireference
Correlation in Long Molecules With the Quadratic Scaling Density
Matrix Renormalization Group. J. Chem. Phys. 2006 ,125, 144101.
(132) Neuscamman, E.; Yanai, T.; Chan, G. K.-L. A Review of
Canonical Transformation Theory. Int. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2010 ,29,
231−271.
(133) Kurashige, Y.; Yanai, T. Second-Order Perturbation Theory
With a Density Matrix Renormalization Group Self-Consistent Field
Reference Function: Theory and Application to the Study of
Chromium Dimer. J. Chem. Phys. 2011 ,135, No. 094104.
(134) Saitow, M.; Kurashige, Y.; Yanai, T. Multireference
Configuration Interaction Theory Using Cumulant ReconstructionWith Internal Contraction of Density Matrix Renormalization Group
Wave Function. J. Chem. Phys. 2013 ,139, No. 044118.
(135) Sharma, S.; Chan, G. K.-L. Communication: A Flexible Multi-
Reference Perturbation Theory by Minimizing the Hylleraas Func-
tional With Matrix Product States. J. Chem. Phys. 2014 ,141, 111101.
(136) Jeanmairet, G.; Sharma, S.; Alavi, A. Stochastic Multi-
Reference Perturbation Theory With Application to the Linearized
Coupled Cluster Method. J. Chem. Phys. 2017 ,146, No. 044107.
(137) Yanai, T.; Saitow, M.; Xiong, X.-G.; Chalupsky ́, J.; Kurashige,
Y.; Guo, S.; Sharma, S. Multistate Complete-Active-Space Second-
Order Perturbation Theory Based on Density Matrix Renormalization
Group Reference States. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2017 ,13, 4829−
4840.
(138) Freitag, L.; Knecht, S.; Angeli, C.; Reiher, M. Multireference
Perturbation Theory With Cholesky Decomposition for the DensityMatrix Renormalization Group. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2017 ,13,
451−459.
(139) Hedegård, E. D.; Knecht, S.; Kielberg, J. S.; Jensen, H. J. A.;
Reiher, M. Density Matrix Renormalization Group With Efficient
Dynamical Electron Correlation Through Range Separation. J. Chem.
Phys. 2015 ,142, 224108.
(140) Veis, L.; Antalík, A.; Brabec, J.; Neese, F.; Legeza, O.; Pittner,
J. Coupled Cluster Method With Single and Double Excitations
Tailored by Matrix Product State Wave Functions. J. Phys. Chem. Lett.
2016 ,7, 4072−4078.Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510908


--- PAGE 54 ---
(141) Oru ́s, R. A Practical Introduction to Tensor Networks: Matrix
Product States and Projected Entangled Pair States. Ann. Phys. 2014 ,
349, 117−158.
(142) Verstraete, F.; Cirac, J. I. Renormalization Algorithms for
Quantum-Many Body Systems in Two and Higher Dimensions. 2004,
arXiv:cond-mat/0407066 [cond-mat.str-el]; https://arxiv.org/abs/
cond-mat/0407066 .
(143) Shi, Y.-Y.; Duan, L.-M.; Vidal, G. Classical Simulation of
Quantum Many-Body Systems With a Tree Tensor Network. Phys.
Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 2006 ,74, 022320.
(144) Murg, V.; Verstraete, F.; Legeza, O.; Noack, R. M. Simulating
Strongly Correlated Quantum Systems With Tree Tensor Networks.
Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2010 ,82, 205105.
(145) Nakatani, N.; Chan, G. K.-L. Efficient Tree Tensor Network
States (TTNS) for Quantum Chemistry: Generalizations of the
Density Matrix Renormalization Group Algorithm. J. Chem. Phys.
2013 ,138, 134113.
(146) Murg, V.; Verstraete, F.; Schneider, R.; Nagy, P. R.; Legeza, O.
Tree Tensor Network State With Variable Tensor Order: An EfficientMultireference Method for Strongly Correlated Systems. J. Chem.
Theory Comput. 2015 ,11, 1027−1036.
(147) Gunst, K.; Verstraete, F.; Wouters, S.; Legeza, O.; Van Neck,
D. T3NS: Three-Legged Tree Tensor Network States. J. Chem.
Theory Comput. 2018 ,14, 2026−2033.
(148) Evenbly, G.; Vidal, G. Class of Highly Entangled Many-Body
States That Can Be Efficiently Simulated. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014 ,112,
240502.
(149) Marti, K. H.; Bauer, B.; Reiher, M.; Troyer, M.; Verstraete, F.
Complete-Graph Tensor Network States: A New Fermionic Wave
Function Ansatz for Molecules. New J. Phys. 2010 ,12, 103008.
(150) Kovyrshin, A.; Reiher, M. Self-Adaptive Tensor Network
States With Multi-Site Correlators. J. Chem. Phys. 2017 ,147, 214111.
(151) Vidal, G. Efficient Classical Simulation of Slightly Entangled
Quantum Computations. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2003 ,91, 147902.
(152) Legeza, O.; So ́lyom, J. Quantum Data Compression, Quantum
Information Generation, and the Density-Matrix Renormalization-
Group Method. Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2004 ,70,
205118.
(153) Leach, A. Molecular Modelling: Principles and Applications , 2nd
ed.; Pearson: Boston, MA, 2001.
(154) Barnett, R. N.; Landman, U. Born-Oppenheimer Molecular-
Dynamics Simulations of Finite Systems: Structure and Dynamics of
(H2O)2. Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 1993 ,48, 2081−
2097.
(155) Car, R.; Parrinello, M. Unified Approach for Molecular
Dynamics and Density Functional Theory. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1985 ,55,
2471−2474.
(156) Zillich, R. E.; Paesani, F.; Kwon, Y.; Whaley, K. B. Path
Integral Methods for Rotating Molecules in Superfluids. J. Chem. Phys.
2005 ,123, 114301.
(157) Paesani, F.; Voth, G. A. The Properties of Water: Insights
From Quantum Simulations. J. Phys. Chem. B 2009 ,113, 5702−5719.
(158) Tuckerman, M. E. Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Molecular
Simulation ; Oxford University Press: Oxford, 2010.
(159) Berne, B. J.; Thirumalai, D. On the Simulation of Quantum
Systems: Path Integral Methods. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 1986 ,37,
401−424.
(160) Cao, J.; Voth, G. A. The Formulation of Quantum Statistical
Mechanics Based on the Feynman Path Centroid Density. II.
Dynamical Properties. J. Chem. Phys. 1994 ,100, 5106−5117.
(161) Habershon, S.; Manolopoulos, D. E.; Markland, T. E.; Miller,
T. F. Ring-Polymer Molecular Dynamics: Quantum Effects inChemical Dynamics From Classical Trajectories in an Extended
Phase Space. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2013 ,64, 387−413.
(162) Petrenko, R.; Meller, J. Molecular Dynamics ; John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.: Hoboken, NJ, 2010.
(163) Tannor, D. J. Introduction to Quantum Mechanics: A Time-
Dependent Perspective ; University Science Books: Sausalito, CA, 2007.(164) Moler, C.; Van Loan, C. Nineteen Dubious Ways to Compute
the Exponential of a Matrix Twenty-Five Years Later. SIAM Rev.
2003 ,45,3−49.
(165) Bardsley, J. N.; Sundaram, B.; Pinnaduwage, L. A.; Bayfield, J.
E. Quantum Dynamics for Driven Weakly Bound Electrons Near theThreshold for Classical Chaos. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1986 ,56, 1007−1010.
(166) Bruderer, M.; Contreras-Pulido, L. D.; Thaller, M.; Sironi, L.;
Obreschkow, D.; Plenio, M. B. Inverse Counting Statistics for
Stochastic and Open Quantum Systems: The CharacteristicPolynomial Approach. New J. Phys. 2014 ,16, No. 033030.
(167) Sidje, R.; Expokit, B. A Software Package for Computing
Matrix Exponentials. ACM Trans Math Softw. 1998 ,24, 130−156.
(168) Schomerus, H.; Tworzyd ło, J. Quantum-To-Classical Cross-
over of Quasibound States in Open Quantum Systems. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2004 ,93, 154102.
(169) Chen, X.; Batista, V. S. Matching-Pursuit/Split-Operator-
Fourier-Transform Simulations of Excited-State Nonadiabatic Quan-tum Dynamics in Pyrazine. J. Chem. Phys. 2006 ,125, 124313.
(170) Sawaya, N. P. D.; Huh, J.; Fujita, T.; Saikin, S. K.; Aspuru-
Guzik, A. Fast Delocalization Leads to Robust Long-Range ExcitonicTransfer in a Large Quantum Chlorosome Model. Nano Lett. 2015 ,
15, 1722−1729.
(171) Runge, E.; Gross, E. K. U. Density-Functional Theory for
Time-Dependent Systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1984 ,52, 997−1000.
(172) Burke, K.; Werschnik, J.; Gross, E. K. U. Time-Dependent
Density Functional Theory: Past Present, and Future. J. Chem. Phys.
2005 ,123, No. 062206.
(173) Casida, M. E. Time-Dependent Density-Functional Theory
for Molecules and Molecular Solids. J. Mol. Struct.: THEOCHEM
2009 ,914,3−18.
(174) Casida, M. E. Recent Advances in Density Functional Methods ;
World Scienti ﬁc, 1995; pp 155 −192.
(175) Nakatani, N.; Wouters, S.; Van Neck, D.; Chan, G. K.-L.
Linear Response Theory for the Density Matrix RenormalizationGroup: Efficient Algorithms for Strongly Correlated Excited States. J.
Chem. Phys. 2014 ,140, No. 024108.
(176) Dorando, J. J.; Hachmann, J.; Chan, G. K.-L. Analytic
Response Theory for the Density Matrix Renormalization Group. J.
Chem. Phys. 2009 ,130, 184111.
(177) Monkhorst, H. J. Calculation of Properties With the Coupled-
Cluster Method. Int. J. Quantum Chem. 1977 ,12, 421−432.
(178) Dalgaard, E.; Monkhorst, H. J. Some Aspects of the Time-
Dependent Coupled-Cluster Approach to Dynamic Response
Functions. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 1983 ,28, 1217−1222.
(179) Pedersen, T. B.; Koch, H. Coupled Cluster Response
Functions Revisited. J. Chem. Phys. 1997 ,106, 8059−8072.
(180) Dirac, P. A. M. Note on Exchange Phenomena in the Thomas
Atom. Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 1930 ,26, 376.
(181) Haegeman, J.; Osborne, T. J.; Verstraete, F. Post-Matrix
Product State Methods: To Tangent Space and Beyond. Phys. Rev. B:
Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2013 ,88, 075133.
(182) McLachlan, A. A Variational Solution of the Time-Dependent
Schrodinger Equation. Mol. Phys. 1964 ,8,3 9−44.
(183) Carleo, G.; Becca, F.; Schiro ́, M.; Fabrizio, M. Localization
and Glassy Dynamics of Many-Body Quantum Systems. Sci. Rep.
2012 ,2, 243.
(184) Ido, K.; Ohgoe, T.; Imada, M. Time-Dependent Many-
Variable Variational Monte Carlo Method for Nonequilibrium
Strongly Correlated Electron Systems. Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter
Mater. Phys. 2015 ,92, 245106.
(185) Haegeman, J.; Cirac, J. I.; Osborne, T. J.; Piz ̌orn, I.;
Verschelde, H.; Verstraete, F. Time-Dependent Variational Principlefor Quantum Lattices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011 ,107, 070601.
(186) Vidal, G. Efficient Simulation of One-Dimensional Quantum
Many-Body Systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004 ,93, 040502.
(187) Schollwo ̈ck, U. Methods for Time Dependence in DMRG.
AIP Conf. Proc. 2005 ,816, 155.
(188) Manthe, U.; Meyer, H.-D.; Cederbaum, L. S. Wave-Packet
Dynamics Within the Multiconfiguration Hartree Framework:Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510909


--- PAGE 55 ---
General Aspects and Application to NOCl. J. Chem. Phys. 1992 ,97,
3199−3213.
(189) Wu, Y.; Batista, V. S. Matching-Pursuit for Simulations of
Quantum Processes. J. Chem. Phys. 2003 ,118, 6720−6724.
(190) Ben-Nun, M.; Martinez, T. J. Nonadiabatic Molecular
Dynamics: Validation of the Multiple Spawning Method for aMultidimensional Problem. J. Chem. Phys. 1998 ,108, 7244−7257.
(191) Crespo-Otero, R.; Barbatti, M. Recent Advances and
Perspectives on Nonadiabatic Mixed Quantum −Classical Dynamics.
Chem. Rev. 2018 ,118, 7026−7068.
(192) Matsika, S.; Krause, P. Nonadiabatic Events and Conical
Intersections. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2011 ,62, 621−643.
(193) Bravyi, S. B.; Kitaev, A. Y. Fermionic Quantum Computation.
Ann. Phys. 2002 ,298, 210.
(194) Seeley, J. T.; Richard, M. J.; Love, P. J. The Bravyi −Kitaev
Transformation for Quantum Computation of Electronic Structure. J.
Chem. Phys. 2012 ,137, 224109.
(195) von Neumann, J. Mathematical Foundations of Quantum
Mechanics ; Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ, 1949 (trans-
lation from German edition).
(196) Brassard, G.; Hø yer, P.; Mosca, M.; Tapp, A. Quantum
Computation and Information ; American Mathematical Society:
Providence, RI, 2002; Vol. 305;p p5 3 −74.
(197) Reiher, M.; Wiebe, N.; Svore, K. M.; Wecker, D.; Troyer, M.
Elucidating Reaction Mechanisms on Quantum Computers. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2017 ,114, 7555−7560.
(198) Kivlichan, I. D.; Gidney, C.; Berry, D. W.; Wiebe, N.;
McClean, J.; Sun, W.; Jiang, Z.; Rubin, N.; Fowler, A.; Aspuru-Guzik,
A.; Babbush, R.; Neven, H. Improved Fault Tolerant Quantum
Simulation of Condensed-Phase Correlated Electrons via Trotteriza-
tion. 2019, arXiv:1902.10673 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.
10673 .
(199) Freitas, N.; Morigi, G.; Dunjko, V. Neural Network
Operations and Susuki −Trotter Evolution of Neural Network States.
Int. J. Quantum Inf. 2018
,16, 1840008.
(200) Cohen, G.; Gull, E.; Reichman, D. R.; Millis, A. J. Taming the
Dynamical Sign Problem in Real-Time Evolution of Quantum Many-
Body Problems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015 ,115, 266802.
(201) Whitfield, J. D.; Biamonte, J.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Simulation of
Electronic Structure Hamiltonians Using Quantum Computers. Mol.
Phys. 2011 ,109, 735−750.
(202) Berry, D. W.; Childs, A. M.; Cleve, R.; Kothari, R.; Somma, R.
D. Exponential Improvement in Precision for Simulating SparseHamiltonians. Proceedings of the Forty-Sixth Annual ACM Symposium
on Theory of Computing , New York, 2014; pp 283 −292.
(203) Berry, D. W.; Childs, A. M.; Cleve, R.; Kothari, R.; Somma, R.
D. Simulating Hamiltonian Dynamics With a Truncated Taylor
Series. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015 ,114, 090502.
(204) Low, G. H.; Chuang, I. L. Hamiltonian Simulation by
Qubitization. 2016, arXiv:1610.06546 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/
abs/1610.06546 .
(205) Low, G. H.; Chuang, I. L. Optimal Hamiltonian Simulation by
Quantum Signal Processing. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017 ,118, No. 010501.
(206) Babbush, R.; Berry, D. W.; Sanders, Y. R.; Kivlichan, I. D.;
Scherer, A.; Wei, A. Y.; Love, P. J.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Exponentially
More Precise Quantum Simulation of Fermions in the Configuration
Interaction Representation. Quantum Sci. Technol. 2018 ,3,
No. 015006.
(207) Babbush, R.; Berry, D. W.; Kivlichan, I. D.; Wei, A. Y.; Love,
P. J.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Exponentially More Precise Quantum
Simulation of Fermions in Second Quantization. New J. Phys. 2016 ,
18, No. 033032.
(208) Wang, H.; Ashhab, S.; Nori, F. Quantum Algorithm for
Simulating the Dynamics of an Open Quantum System. Phys. Rev. A:
At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 2011 ,83, 062317.
(209) Childs, A. M.; Li, T. Efficient Simulation of Sparse Markovian
Quantum Dynamics. Quantum Inf. Comput. 2017 ,17, 901−947.(210) Cleve, R.; Wang, C. E ﬃcient Quantum Algorithms for
Simulating Lindblad Evolution. 2016, arXiv:1612.09512 [quant-ph];https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.09512 .
(211) Wiebe, N.; Berry, D.; Høyer, P.; Sanders, B. C. Higher Order
Decompositions of Ordered Operator Exponentials. J. Phys. A: Math.
Theor. 2010 ,43, No. 065203.
(212) Low, G. H.; Wiebe, N. Hamiltonian Simulation in the
Interaction Picture. 2018, arXiv:1805.00675 [quant-ph]; https://
arxiv.org/abs/1805.00675 .
(213) Babbush, R.; Berry, D. W.; McClean, J. R.; Neven, H.
Quantum Simulation of Chemistry With Sublinear Scaling to theContinuum. 2018, arXiv:1807.09802 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/
abs/1807.09802 .
(214) Kieferova ́, M.; Scherer, A.; Berry, D. W. Simulating the
Dynamics of Time-Dependent Hamiltonians With a Truncated
Dyson Series. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 2019 ,99, No. 042314.
(215) Dirac, P. A. M. The Principles of Quantum Mechanics ; Oxford
University Press: Oxford, 1930.
(216) Frenkel, J. Wave Mechanics: Advanced General Theory ; Oxford
University Press: Oxford, 1934.
(217) Clay Mathematics Institute. P vs NP Problem. http://www.
claymath.org/millennium-problems/p-vs-np-problem (accessed June
26, 2018).
(218) Aaronson, S. BQP and the Polynomial Hierarchy. Proceedings
of the Forty-Second ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , New
York, 2010; pp 141 −150.
(219) Osborne, T. J. Hamiltonian Complexity. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2012 ,
75, No. 022001.
(220) Gharibian, S.; Huang, Y.; Landau, Z.; Shin, S. W. Quantum
Hamiltonian Complexity. FnT-TCS 2014 ,10, 159−282.
(221) Oliveira, R.; Terhal, B. M. The Complexity of Quantum Spin
Systems on a Two Dimensional Square Lattice. Quantum Info.
Comput. 2008 ,8, 900−924.
(222) Biamonte, J. D.; Love, P. J. Realizable Hamiltonians for
Universal Adiabatic Quantum Computers. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt.
Phys. 2008 ,78, 012352.
(223) Barahona, F. On the Computational Complexity of Ising Spin
Glass Models. J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 1982 ,15, 3241−3253.
(224) Childs, A. M.; Gosset, D.; Webb, Z. Automata Languages, and
Programming ; Springer: Berlin, Heidelberg, 2014; pp 308 −319.
(225) Bookatz, A. D. QMA-complete Problems. Quantum Info.
Comput. 2014 ,14, 361−383.
(226) Rassolov, V. A.; Garashchuk, S. Computational Complexity in
Quantum Chemistry. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2008 ,464, 262−264.
(227) Whitfield, J. D.; Zimbora ́s, Z. On the NP-completeness of the
Hartree-Fock Method for Translationally Invariant Systems. J. Chem.
Phys. 2014 ,141, 234103.
(228) Mazziotti, D. A. Parametrization of the Two-Electron
Reduced Density Matrix for Its Direct Calculation Without theMany-Electron Wave Function. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008 ,101, 253002.
(229) Mazziotti, D. A. Parametrization of the Two-Electron
Reduced Density Matrix for Its Direct Calculation Without theMany-Electron Wave Function: Generalizations and Applications.Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 2010 ,81, 062515.
(230) Whitfield, J. D.; Yung, M.-H.; Tempel, D. G.; Boixo, S.;
Aspuru-Guzik, A. Computational Complexity of Time-Dependent
Density Functional Theory. New J. Phys. 2014 ,16, No. 083035.
(231) Wocjan, P.; Zhang, S. Several Natural BQP-Complete
Problems. 2006, arXiv:quant-ph/0606179; https://arxiv.org/abs/
quant-ph/0606179 .
(232) Franck, J.; Dymond, E. G. Elementary Processes of
Photochemical Reactions. Trans. Faraday Soc. 1926 ,21, 536.
(233) Duschinsky, F. The Importance of the Electron Spectrum in
Multi Atomic Molecules. Concerning the Franck-Condon Principle.Acta Physicochim. URSS 1937 ,7.551566
(234) Doktorov, E.; Malkin, I.; Man ’ko, V. Dynamical Symmetry of
Vibronic Transitions in Polyatomic Molecules and the Franck-Condon Principle. J. Mol. Spectrosc. 1977 ,64, 302−326.Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510910


--- PAGE 56 ---
(235) Ma, X.; Rhodes, W. Multimode Squeeze Operators and
Squeezed States. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 1990 ,41, 4625−
4631.
(236) Valiant, L. The Complexity of Computing the Permanent.
Theor. Comput. Sci. 1979 ,8, 189−201.
(237) Ryser, H. J. Combinatorial Mathematics ;M a t h e m a t i c a l
Association of America, 1963.
(238) Gard, B. T.; Motes, K. R.; Olson, J. P.; Rohde, P. P.; Dowling,
J. P. An Introduction to Boson-Sampling. In From Atomic to Mesoscale ;
Malinovskaya, S. A., Novikova, I., Eds.; World Scienti ﬁc, 2015;
Chapter 8, pp 167 −192.
(239) Seshadreesan, K. P.; Olson, J. P.; Motes, K. R.; Rohde, P. P.;
Dowling, J. P. Boson Sampling With Displaced Single-Photon Fock
States Versus Single-Photon-Added Coherent States: The Quantum-
Classical Divide and Computational-Complexity Transitions in Linear
Optics. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 2015 ,91, No. 022334.
(240) Olson, J.; Seshadreesan, K.; Motes, K.; Rohde, P.; Dowling, J.
Sampling Arbitrary Photon-Added or Photon-Subtracted Squeezed
States Is in the Same Complexity Class as Boson Sampling. Phys. Rev.
A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 2015 ,91, No. 022317.
(241) Lund, A. P.; Laing, A.; Rahimi-Keshari, S.; Rudolph, T.;
O’Brien, J. L.; Ralph, T. C. Boson Sampling From a Gaussian State.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014 ,113, 100502.
(242) Rahimi-Keshari, S.; Lund, A. P.; Ralph, T. C. What Can
Quantum Optics Say About Computational Complexity Theory?
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015 ,114, No. 060501.
(243) Hamilton, C.; Kruse, R.; Sansoni, L.; Barkhofen, S.;
Silberhorn, C.; Jex, I. Gaussian Boson Sampling. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2017 ,119, 170501.
(244) Huh, J.; Guerreschi, G. G.; Peropadre, B.; McClean, J. R.;
Aspuru-Guzik, A. Boson Sampling for Molecular Vibronic Spectra.
Nat. Photonics 2015 ,9, 615−620.
(245) Huh, J.; Yung, M.-H. Vibronic Boson Sampling: Generalized
Gaussian Boson Sampling for Molecular Vibronic Spectra at Finite
Temperature. Sci. Rep. 2017 ,7, 7462.
(246) Sattasathuchana, T.; Murri, R.; Baldridge, K. An Efficient
Analytic Approach for Calculation of Multi-Dimensional Franck −
Condon Factors and Associated Photoelectron Spectra. J. Chem.
Theory Comput. 2017 ,13, 2147−2158.
(247) Feynman, R. P. Quantum Mechanical Computers. Optics News
1985 ,11,1 1−20.
(248) Kitaev, A. Y. Quantum Measurements and the Abelian
Stabilizer Problem. 1995, arXiv:quant-ph/9511026; https://arxiv.org/
abs/quant-ph/9511026 .
(249) Clader, B. D.; Jacobs, B. C.; Sprouse, C. R. Preconditioned
Quantum Linear System Algorithm. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013 ,110,
250504.
(250) Sugisaki, K.; Yamamoto, S.; Nakazawa, S.; Toyota, K.; Sato,
K.; Shiomi, D.; Takui, T. Quantum Chemistry on Quantum
Computers: A Polynomial-Time Quantum Algorithm for Construct-
ing the Wave Functions of Open-Shell Molecules. J. Phys. Chem. A
2016 ,120, 6459−6466.
(251) Lanyon, B. P.; Whitfield, J. D.; Gillett, G. G.; Goggin, M. E.;
Almeida, M. P.; Kassal, I.; Biamonte, J. D.; Mohseni, M.; Powell, B. J.;
Barbieri, M.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; White, A. G. Towards QuantumChemistry on a Quantum Computer. Nat. Chem. 2010 ,2, 106−111.
(252) Du, J.; Xu, N.; Peng, X.; Wang, P.; Wu, S.; Lu, D. NMR
Implementation of a Molecular Hydrogen Quantum Simulation With
Adiabatic State Preparation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2010 ,104, 030502.
(253) Dolde, F.; Bergholm, V.; Wang, Y.; Jakobi, I.; Naydenov, B.;
Pezzagna, S.; Meijer, J.; Jelezko, F.; Neumann, P.; Schulte-
Herbru ̈ggen, T.; Biamonte, J.; Wrachtrup, J. High Fidelity Spin
Entanglement Using Optimal Control. Nat. Commun. 2014 ,5, 3371.
(254) Fowler, A. G.; Mariantoni, M.; Martinis, J. M.; Cleland, A. N.
Surface Codes: Towards Practical Large-Scale Quantum Computa-
tion. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 2012 ,86, No. 032324.
(255) Gottesman, D. An Introduction to Quantum Error Correction
and Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computation. 2009, arXiv:0904.2557[quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/0904.2557 .(256) Aharonov, D.; Ben-Or, M. Fault-Tolerant Quantum
Computation With Constant Error. Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth
Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , New York, 1997; pp
176−188.
(257) Harrow, A. W.; Hassidim, A.; Lloyd, S. Quantum Algorithm
for Linear Systems of Equations. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009 ,103, 150502.
(258) Chowdhury, A. N.; Somma, R. D. Quantum Algorithms for
Gibbs Sampling and Hitting-Time Estimation. Quantum Info. Comput.
2017 ,17,4 1−64.
(259) Wiebe, N.; Braun, D.; Lloyd, S. Quantum Algorithm for Data
Fitting. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2012 ,109, No. 050505.
(260) Lloyd, S.; Mohseni, M.; Rebentrost, P. Quantum Principal
Component Analysis. Nat. Phys. 2014 ,10, 631.
(261) Rebentrost, P.; Mohseni, M.; Lloyd, S. Quantum Support
Vector Machine for Big Data Classification. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014 ,113,
130503.
(262) Islam, R.; Senko, C.; Campbell, W.; Korenblit, S.; Smith, J.;
Lee, A.; Edwards, E.; Wang, C.-C.; Freericks, J.; Monroe, C.Emergence and Frustration of Magnetism With Variable-Range
Interactions in a Quantum Simulator. Science 2013 ,340, 583−587.
(263) Choi, J.-y.; Hild, S.; Zeiher, J.; Schauß, P.; Rubio-Abadal, A.;
Yefsah, T.; Khemani, V.; Huse, D. A.; Bloch, I.; Gross, C. Exploring
the Many-Body Localization Transition in Two Dimensions. Science
2016 ,352, 1547−1552.
(264) Zhang, J.; Pagano, G.; Hess, P. W.; Kyprianidis, A.; Becker, P.;
Kaplan, H.; Gorshkov, A. V.; Gong, Z.-X.; Monroe, C. Observation of
a Many-Body Dynamical Phase Transition With a 53-Qubit Quantum
Simulator. Nature 2017 ,551, 601.
(265) Mazurenko, A.; Chiu, C. S.; Ji, G.; Parsons, M. F.; Kana ́sz-
Nagy, M.; Schmidt, R.; Grusdt, F.; Demler, E.; Greif, D.; Greiner, M.
A Cold-Atom Fermi −Hubbard Antiferromagnet. Nature 2017 ,545,
462.
(266) Childs, A. M. Quantum Information Processing in Continuous
Time. Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2004.
(267) Dodd, J. L.; Nielsen, M. A.; Bremner, M. J.; Thew, R. T.
Universal Quantum Computation and Simulation Using AnyEntangling Hamiltonian and Local Unitaries. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol.,
Opt. Phys. 2002 ,65, No. 040301.
(268) Nielsen, M. A.; Bremner, M. J.; Dodd, J. L.; Childs, A. M.;
Dawson, C. M. Universal Simulation of Hamiltonian Dynamics for
Quantum Systems With Finite-Dimensional State Spaces. Phys. Rev.
A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 2002 ,66, No. 022317.
(269) Aharonov, D.; Ta-Shma, A. Adiabatic Quantum State
Generation and Statistical Zero Knowledge. Proceedings of the
Thirty-Fifth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , New
York, 2003; pp 20 −29.
(270) Toloui, B.; Love, P. J. Quantum Algorithms for Quantum
Chemistry Based on the Sparsity of the CI-matrix. 2013,
arXiv:1312.2579 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.2579 .
(271) Haah, J.; Hastings, M. B.; Kothari, R.; Low, G. H. Quantum
Algorithm for Simulating Real Time Evolution of Lattice Hamil-tonians. 2018, arXiv:1801.03922 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/
1801.03922 .
(272) Childs, A. M.; Wiebe, N. Hamiltonian Simulation Using
Linear Combinations of Unitary Operations. Quantum Info. Comput.
2012 ,12, 901−924.
(273) Childs, A. M.; Kothari, R. Simulating Sparse Hamiltonians
With Star Decompositions, Conference on Quantum Computation,
Communication, and Cryptography , 2010; pp 94 −103.
(274) Wang, D.; Higgott, O.; Brierley, S. A Generalised Variational
Quantum Eigensolver. 2018, arXiv:1802.00171 [quant-ph]; https://
arxiv.org/abs/1802.00171 .
(275) Kimmel, S.; Lin, C. Y.-Y.; Low, G. H.; Ozols, M.; Yoder, T. J.
Hamiltonian Simulation With Optimal Sample Complexity. npj
Quantum Inf. 2017 ,3, 13.
(276) Berry, D. W.; Ahokas, G.; Cleve, R.; Sanders, B. C. Efficient
Quantum Algorithms for Simulating Sparse Hamiltonians. Commun.
Math. Phys. 2007 ,270, 359−371.Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510911


--- PAGE 57 ---
(277) Suzuki, M. Fractal Decomposition of Exponential Operators
With Applications to Many-Body Theories and Monte Carlo
Simulations. Phys. Lett. A 1990 ,146, 319−323.
(278) Childs, A. M. On the Relationship Between Continuous-And
Discrete-Time Quantum Walk. Commun. Math. Phys. 2010 ,294,
581−603.
(279) Berry, D. W.; Childs, A. M. Black-Box Hamiltonian Simulation
and Unitary Implementation. Quantum Info. Comput. 2012 ,12,2 9−
62.
(280) Cleve, R.; Ekert, A.; Macchiavello, C.; Mosca, M. Quantum
Algorithms Revisited. Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 1998 ,454, 339−
354.
(281) Low, G. H.; Yoder, T. J.; Chuang, I. L. Methodology of
Resonant Equiangular Composite Quantum Gates. Phys. Rev. X 2016 ,
6, No. 041067.
(282) Low, G. H. Hamiltonian Simulation With Nearly Optimal
Dependence on Spectral Norm. 2018, arXiv:1807.03967 [quant-ph];
https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.03967 .
(283) Gilye ́n, A.; Su, Y.; Low, G. H.; Wiebe, N. Quantum Singular
Value Transformation and Beyond: Exponential Improvements for
Quantum Matrix Arithmetics. 2018, arXiv:1806.01838 [quant-ph];
https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.01838 .
(284) Low, G. H.; Chuang, I. L. Hamiltonian Simulation by Uniform
Spectral Ampli ﬁcation. 2017, arXiv:1707.05391 [quant-ph]; https://
arxiv.org/abs/1806.01838 .
(285) Wang, C.; Wossnig, L. A Quantum Algorithm for Simulating
Non-Sparse Hamiltonians. 2018, arXiv:1803.08273 [quant-ph];
https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.08273 .
(286) Poulin, D.; Qarry, A.; Somma, R.; Verstraete, F. Quantum
Simulation of Time Dependent Hamiltonians and the Convenient
Illusion of Hilbert Space. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011 ,106, 170501.
(287) Wiebe, N.; Berry, D. W.; Høyer, P.; Sanders, B. C. Simulating
Quantum Dynamics on a Quantum Computer. J. Phys. A: Math.
Theor. 2011 ,44, 445308.
(288) Kliesch, M.; Barthel, T.; Gogolin, C.; Kastoryano, M.; Eisert, J.
Dissipative Quantum Church-Turing Theorem. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011 ,
107, 120501.
(289) Childs, A. M.; Maslov, D.; Nam, Y.; Ross, N. J.; Su, Y. Toward
the First Quantum Simulation With Quantum Speedup. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2018 ,115, 9456−9461.
(290) Zalka, C. Simulating Quantum Systems on a Quantum
Computer. Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 1998 ,454, 313−322.
(291) Giovannetti, V.; Lloyd, S.; Maccone, L. Architectures for a
Quantum Random Access Memory. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys.
2008 ,78, No. 052310.
(292) Dobs ̌íček, M.; Johansson, G.; Shumeiko, V.; Wendin, G.
Arbitrary Accuracy Iterative Quantum Phase Estimation Algorithm
Using a Single Ancillary Qubit: A Two-Qubit Benchmark. Phys. Rev.
A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 2007 ,76, 030306.
(293) Svore, K. M.; Hastings, M. B.; Freedman, M. Faster Phase
Estimation. Quantum Inf. Comput. 2013 ,14, 306−328.
(294) Wiebe, N.; Granade, C. Efficient Bayesian Phase Estimation.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2016 ,117, No. 010503.
(295) Paesani, S.; Gentile, A. A.; Santagati, R.; Wang, J.; Wiebe, N.;
Tew, D. P.; O ’Brien, J. L.; Thompson, M. G. Experimental Bayesian
Quantum Phase Estimation on a Silicon Photonic Chip. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 2017 ,118, 100503.
(296) Berry, D. W.; Kieferova ́, M.; Scherer, A.; Sanders, Y. R.; Low,
G. H.; Wiebe, N.; Gidney, C.; Babbush, R. Improved Techniques for
Preparing Eigenstates of Fermionic Hamiltonians. npj Quantum Inf.
2018 ,4, 22.
(297) Poulin, D.; Kitaev, A.; Steiger, D. S.; Hastings, M. B.; Troyer,
M. Quantum Algorithm for Spectral Measurement With a Lower Gate
Count. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018 ,121, No. 010501.
(298) Babbush, R.; Gidney, C.; Berry, D. W.; Wiebe, N.; McClean,
J.; Paler, A.; Fowler, A.; Neven, H. Encoding Electronic Spectra in
Quantum Circuits With Linear T Complexity. Phys. Rev. X 2018 ,8,
No. 041015.(299) Bernstein, E.; Vazirani, U. Quantum Complexity Theory.
SIAM J. Comput. 1997 ,26, 1411−1473.
(300) Aaronson, S.; Ambainis, A. Forrelation: A Problem That
Optimally Separates Quantum From Classical Computing. SIAM J.
Comput. 2018 ,47, 982−1038.
(301) Griffiths, R. B.; Niu, C.-S. Semiclassical Fourier Transform for
Quantum Computation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1996 ,76, 3228−3231.
(302) Higgins, B. L.; Berry, D. W.; Bartlett, S. D.; Wiseman, H. M.;
Pryde, G. J. Entanglement-Free Heisenberg-Limited Phase Estima-tion. Nature 2007 ,450, 393.
(303) Whit ﬁeld, J. D. Uni ﬁed Views of Quantum Simulation
Algorithms for Chemistry. 2015, arXiv:1502.03771 [quant-ph];
https://arxiv.org/abs/1502.03771 .
(304) Grover, L.; Rudolph, T. Creating Superpositions That
Correspond to E ﬃciently Integrable Probability Distributions. 2002,
arXiv:quant-ph/0208112[quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/
0208112 .
(305) Abrams, D. S. Quantum Algorithms. Ph.D. thesis,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1999.
(306) Tubman, N. M.; Mejuto-Zaera, C.; Epstein, J. M.; Hait, D.;
Levine, D. S.; Huggins, W.; Jiang, Z.; McClean, J. R.; Babbush, R.;Head-Gordon, M.; Whaley, K. B. Postponing the Orthogonality
Catastrophe: E ﬃcient State Preparation for Electronic Structure
Simulations on Quantum Devices. 2018, arXiv:1809.05523 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.05523 .
(307) Soklakov, A. N.; Schack, R. Efficient State Preparation for a
Register of Quantum Bits. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 2006 ,73,
No. 012307.
(308) Tubman, N. M.; Lee, J.; Takeshita, T. Y.; Head-Gordon, M.;
Whaley, K. B. A Deterministic Alternative to the Full Configuration
Interaction Quantum Monte Carlo Method. J. Chem. Phys. 2016 ,145,
No. 044112.
(309) Farhi, E.; Goldstone, J.; Gutmann, S.; Lapan, J.; Lundgren, A.;
Preda, D. A Quantum Adiabatic Evolution Algorithm Applied toRandom Instances of an NP-complete Problem. Science 2001 ,292,
472−475.
(310) Marzlin, K.-P.; Sanders, B. C. Inconsistency in the Application
of the Adiabatic Theorem. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004 ,93, 160408.
(311) Cheung, D.; Høyer, P.; Wiebe, N. Improved Error Bounds for
the Adiabatic Approximation. J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 2011 ,44,
415302.
(312) Wiebe, N.; Babcock, N. S. Improved Error-Scaling for
Adiabatic Quantum Evolutions. New J. Phys. 2012 ,14, No. 013024.
(313) Lidar, D. A.; Rezakhani, A. T.; Hamma, A. Adiabatic
Approximation With Exponential Accuracy for Many-Body Systems
and Quantum Computation. J. Math. Phys. 2009 ,50, 102106.
(314) Kieferova ́, M.; Wiebe, N. On the Power of Coherently
Controlled Quantum AdiabaticEvolutions.
New J. Phys. 2014 ,16,
123034.
(315) Roland, J.; Cerf, N. J. Quantum Search by Local Adiabatic
Evolution. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 2002 ,65, No. 042308.
(316) Somma, R. D.; Nagaj, D.; Kieferova ́, M. Quantum Speedup by
Quantum Annealing. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012 ,109, No. 050501.
(317) Crosson, E.; Farhi, E.; Yen-Yu Lin, C.; Lin, H.-H.; Shor, P.
Diﬀerent Strategies for Optimization Using the Quantum Adiabatic
Algorithm. 2014, arXiv:1401.7320 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/
1401.7320 .
(318) Yung, M.-H.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. A Quantum −Quantum
Metropolis Algorithm. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2012 ,109,
754−759.
(319) Temme, K.; Osborne, T. J.; Vollbrecht, K. G.; Poulin, D.;
Verstraete, F. Quantum Metropolis Sampling. Nature 2011 ,471,8 7−
90.
(320) Dallaire-Demers, P.-L.; Wilhelm, F. K. Method to Efficiently
Simulate the Thermodynamic Properties of the Fermi −Hubbard
Model on a Quantum Computer. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys.
2016 ,93, No. 032303.
(321) Riera, A.; Gogolin, C.; Eisert, J. Thermalization in Nature and
on a Quantum Computer. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012 ,108, No. 080402.Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510912


--- PAGE 58 ---
(322) Ditchfield, R.; Hehre, W. J.; Pople, J. A. Self-Consistent
Molecular-Orbital Methods. IX. An Extended Gaussian-Type Basis forMolecular-Orbital Studies of Organic Molecules. J. Chem. Phys. 1971 ,
54, 724−728.
(323) Babbush, R.; Wiebe, N.; McClean, J.; McClain, J.; Neven, H.;
Chan, G. K.-L. Low Depth Quantum Simulation of Materials. Phys.
Rev. X 2018 ,8, No. 011044.
(324) Kivlichan, I. D.; McClean, J.; Wiebe, N.; Gidney, C.; Aspuru-
Guzik, A.; Chan, G. K.-L.; Babbush, R. Quantum Simulation ofElectronic Structure With Linear Depth and Connectivity. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 2018 ,120, 110501.
(325) White, S. R. Hybrid Grid/Basis Set Discretizations of the
Schrödinger Equation. J. Chem. Phys. 2017 ,147, 244102.
(326) Jones, N. C.; Whitfield, J. D.; McMahon, P. L.; Yung, M.-H.;
Meter, R. V.; AspuruGuzik, A.; Yamamoto, Y. Faster Quantum
Chemistry Simulation on Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computers. New J.
Phys. 2012 ,14, 115023.
(327) McClean, J. R.; Babbush, R.; Love, P. J.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.
Exploiting Locality in Quantum Computation for Quantum
Chemistry. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2014 ,5, 4368−4380.
(328) Kliuchnikov, V.; Maslov, D.; Mosca, M. Fast and Efficient
Exact Synthesis of Single Qubit Unitaries Generated by Clifford and T
Gates. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013 ,13, 607−630.
(329) Gidney, C. Halving the Cost of Quantum Addition. Quantum
2018 ,2, 74.
(330) Veis, L.; Vis ̌ňák, J.; Fleig, T.; Knecht, S.; Saue, T.; Visscher, L.;
Pittner, J. Relativistic Quantum Chemistry on Quantum Computers.Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 2012 ,85, 030304.
(331) Veis, L.; Pittner, J. Advances in Chemical Physics ; John Wiley &
Sons Inc., 2014; pp 107 −136.
(332) Welch, J.; Greenbaum, D.; Mostame, S.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.
Efficient Quantum Circuits for Diagonal Unitaries Without Ancillas.
New J. Phys. 2014 ,16, No. 033040.
(333) Raeisi, S.; Wiebe, N.; Sanders, B. C. Quantum-Circuit Design
for Efficient Simulations of Many-Body Quantum Dynamics. New J.
Phys. 2012 ,14
, 103017.
(334) Berry, D. W.; Childs, A. M.; Kothari, R. Hamiltonian
Simulation With Nearly Optimal Dependence on All Parameters.IEEE 56th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
(FOCS) , 2015; pp 792 −809.
(335) Novo, L.; Berry, D. W. Improved Hamiltonian Simulation via
a Truncated Taylor Series and Corrections. 2016, arXiv:1611.10033
[quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.10033 .
(336) Santagati, R.; Wang, J.; Gentile, A. A.; Paesani, S.; Wiebe, N.;
McClean, J. R.; Morley-Short, S.; Shadbolt, P. J.; Bonneau, D.;Silverstone, J. W.; Tew, D. P.; Zhou, X.; O ’Brien, J. L.; Thompson, M.
G. Witnessing Eigenstates for Quantum Simulation of Hamiltonian
Spectra. Sci. Adv. 2018 ,4, eaap9646.
(337) Temme, K.; Bravyi, S.; Gambetta, J. M. Error Mitigation for
Short-Depth Quantum Circuits. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017 ,119, 180509.
(338) Endo, S.; Benjamin, S. C.; Li, Y. Practical Quantum Error
Mitigation for Near-Future Applications. Phys. Rev. X 2018 ,8,
No. 031027.
(339) Kandala, A.; Temme, K.; Corcoles, A. D.; Mezzacapo, A.;
Chow, J. M.; Gambetta, J. M. Extending the Computational Reach of
a Noisy Superconducting Quantum Processor. 2018,
arXiv:1805.04492 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.04492 .
(340) McClean, J. R.; Kimchi-Schwartz, M. E.; Carter, J.; de Jong,
W. A. Hybrid Quantum Classical Hierarchy for Mitigation ofDecoherence and Determination of Excited States. Phys. Rev. A: At.,
Mol., Opt. Phys. 2017 ,95, 042308.
(341) McClean, J. R.; Boixo, S.; Smelyanskiy, V. N.; Babbush, R.;
Neven, H. Barren Plateaus in Quantum Neural Network Training
Landscapes. Nat. Commun. 2018 ,9, 4812.
(342) Kutzelnigg, W. In Methods of Electronic Structure Theory ;
Schaefer, H. F., III, Ed.; Plenum Press: New York, 1977; p 129.
(343) Hoffmann, M. R.; Simons, J. A Unitary Multiconfigurational
Coupled-Cluster Method: Theory and Applications. J. Chem. Phys.
1988 ,88, 993−1002.(344) Bartlett, R. J.; Kucharski, S. A.; Noga, J. Alternative Coupled-
Cluster Ansa ̈tze II. The Unitary Coupled-Cluster Method. Chem.
Phys. Lett. 1989 ,155, 133−140.
(345) Dallaire-Demers, P.-L.; Romero, J.; Veis, L.; Sim, S.; Aspuru-
Guzik, A. Low-Depth Circuit Ansatz for Preparing Correlated
Fermionic States on a Quantum Computer. 2018, DOI: 10.1088/
2058-9565/ab3951 .
(346) Barkoutsos, P. K.; Gonthier, J. F.; Sokolov, I.; Moll, N.; Salis,
G.; Fuhrer, A.; Ganzhorn, M.; Egger, D. J.; Troyer, M.; Mezzacapo,
A.; Filipp, S.; Tavernelli, I. Quantum Algorithms for Electronic
Structure Calculations: Particle-Hole Hamiltonian and Optimized
Wave-Function Expansions. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 2018 ,
98, No. 022322.
(347) Yung, M.-H.; Casanova, J.; Mezzacapo, A.; McClean, J.;
Lamata, L.; AspuruGuzik, A.; Solano, E. From Transistor to Trapped-
Ion Computers for Quantum Chemistry. Sci. Rep. 2015 ,4, 3589.
(348) Romero, J.; Babbush, R.; McClean, J.; Hempel, C.; Love, P.;
Aspuru-Guzik, A. Strategies for Quantum Computing Molecular
Energies Using the Unitary Coupled Cluster Ansatz. Quantum Sci.
Technol. 2019 ,4, 014008.
(349) Farhi, E.; Goldstone, J.; Gutmann, S. A Quantum
Approximate Optimization Algorithm. 2014, arXiv:1411.4028
[quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/1411.4028 .
(350) Farhi, E.; Harrow, A. W. Quantum Supremacy Through the
Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm. 2016,
arXiv:1602.07674 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/1602.07674 .
(351) Bengio, Y.; Lamblin, P.; Popovici, D.; Larochelle, H. Greedy
Layer-Wise Training of Deep Networks. NIPS ’06: Proceedings of the
19th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems ,
2006; pp 153 −160.
(352) He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; Sun, J. Deep Residual Learning for
Image Recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2016; pp 770 −778.
(353) Jiang, Z.; Sung, K. J.; Kechedzhi, K.; Smelyanskiy, V. N.;
Boixo, S. Quantum Algorithms to Simulate Many-Body Physics of
Correlated Fermions. Phys. Rev. Appl. 2018 ,9, No. 044036.
(354) Wecker, D.; Hastings, M. B.; Wiebe, N.; Clark, B. K.; Nayak,
C.; Troyer, M. Solving Strongly Correlated Electron Models on a
Quantum Computer. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 2015 ,92,
No. 062318.
(355) Hoffman, D. K.; Raffenetti, R. C.; Ruedenberg, K. General-
ization of Euler Angles to N-Dimensional Orthogonal Matrices. J.
Math. Phys. 1972 ,13, 528−533.
(356) Shi, T.; Demler, E.; Cirac, J. I. Variational Study of Fermionic
and Bosonic Systems With Non-Gaussian States: Theory and
Applications. Ann. Phys. 2018 ,390, 245−302.
(357) Endo, S.; Jones, T.; McArdle, S.; Yuan, X.; Benjamin, S.
Variational Quantum Algorithms for Discovering Hamiltonian
Spectra. 2018, arXiv:1806.05707 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/
1806.05707 .
(358) McKay, D. C.; Filipp, S.; Mezzacapo, A.; Magesan, E.; Chow,
J. M.; Gambetta, J. M. Universal Gate for Fixed-Frequency Qubits via
a Tunable Bus. Phys. Rev. Appl. 2016 ,6, No. 064007.
(359) Roth, M.; Ganzhorn, M.; Moll, N.; Filipp, S.; Salis, G.;
Schmidt, S. Analysis of a Parametrically Driven Exchange-Type Gate
and a Two-Photon Excitation Gate Between Superconducting Qubits.
Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 2017 ,96, No. 062323.
(360) Egger, D.; Ganzhorn, M.; Salis, G.; Fuhrer, A.; Mu ̈ller, P.;
Barkoutsos, P.; Moll, N.; Tavernelli, I.; Filipp, S. Entanglement
Generation in Superconducting Qubits Using Holonomic Operations.
Phys. Rev. Appl. 2019 ,11, No. 014017.
(361) Ryabinkin, I. G.; Yen, T.-C.; Genin, S. N.; Izmaylov, A. F.
Qubit Coupled Cluster Method: A Systematic Approach to Quantum
Chemistry on a Quantum Computer. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2018 ,
14, 6317−6326.
(362) Ryabinkin, I. G.; Genin, S. N.; Izmaylov, A. F. Constrained
Variational Quantum Eigensolver: Quantum Computer Search
Engine in the Fock Space. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2019 ,15, 249−
255.Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510913


--- PAGE 59 ---
(363) Bravyi, S.; Gambetta, J. M.; Mezzacapo, A.; Temme, K.
Tapering O ﬀQubits to Simulate Fermionic Hamiltonians. 2017,
arXiv:1701.08213 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.08213 .
(364) Romero, J.; Olson, J. P.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Quantum
Autoencoders for Efficient Compression of Quantum Data. Quantum
Sci. Technol. 2017 ,2, No. 045001.
(365) Olson, J.; Sim, S.; Cao, Y. Implementation of CUSP Using
Cirq. https://github.com/zapatacomputing/cusp_cirq_demo , 2018
(accessed Nov 5, 2018).
(366) Rubin, N. C.; Babbush, R.; McClean, J. Application of
Fermionic Marginal Constraints to Hybrid Quantum Algorithms. New
J. Phys. 2018 ,20, No. 053020.
(367) Artacho, E.; Sa ́nchez-Portal, D.; Ordejo ́n, P.; Garcia, A.; Soler,
J. M. Linear-Scaling Ab-Initio Calculations for Large and ComplexSystems. Phys. Status Solidi B 1999 ,215, 809−817.
(368) Filippi, C.; Umrigar, C. J. Correlated Sampling in Quantum
Monte Carlo: A Route to Forces. Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater.
Phys. 2000 ,61, R16291 −R16294.
(369) Cioslowski, J. Many-Electron Densities and Reduced Density
Matrices ; Springer Science & Business Media, 2000.
(370) Alcoba, D.; Valdemoro, C. Spin Structure and Properties of
the Correlation Matrices Corresponding to Pure Spin States:
Controlling the S-Representability of These Matrices. Int. J. Quantum
Chem. 2005 ,102, 629−644.
(371) Rios, L. M.; Sahinidis, N. V. Derivative-Free Optimization: A
Review of Algorithms and Comparison of Software Implementations.
J. Global Optim. 2013 ,56, 1247−1293.
(372) Guerreschi, G. G.; Smelyanskiy, M. Practical Optimization for
Hybrid Quantum Classical Algorithms. 2017, arXiv:1701.01450[quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.01450 .
(373) Kennedy, J. Encyclopedia of Machine Learning ; Springer, 2011;
pp 760−766.
(374) Spall, J. C. A One-Measurement Form of Simultaneous
Perturbation Stochastic Approximation. Automatica 1997 ,33, 109−
112.
(375) Spall, J. C. Adaptive Stochastic Approximation by the
Simultaneous Perturbation Method. IEEE Trans. Autom. Control
2000 ,45, 1839
−1853.
(376) Han, L.; Neumann, M. Effect of Dimensionality on the
Nelder−Mead Simplex Method. Optim. Methods Softw. 2006 ,21,1−
16.
(377) Bonet-Monroig, X.; Sagastizabal, R.; Singh, M.; O ’Brien, T. E.
Low-Cost Error Mitigation by Symmetry Verification. Phys. Rev. A:
At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 2018 ,98, No. 062339.
(378) McArdle, S.; Yuan, X.; Benjamin, S. Error Mitigated Digital
Quantum Simulation. 2018, arXiv:1807.02467 [quant-ph]; https://
arxiv.org/abs/1807.02467 .
(379) McArdle, S.; Endo, S.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Benjamin, S.; Yuan,
X. Quantum Computational Chemistry. 2018, arXiv:1808.10402
[quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.10402 .
(380) Garcia-Saez, A.; Latorre, J. I. Addressing Hard Classical
Problems With Adiabatically Assisted Variational Quantum Eigensolv-
ers. 2018, arXiv:1806.02287 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.
02287 .
(381) Higgott, O.; Wang, D.; Brierley, S. Variational Quantum
Computation of Excited States. 2018, arXiv:1805.08138 [quant-ph];
https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.08138 .
(382) Angeli, C.; Pastore, M.; Cimiraglia, R. New Perspectives in
Multireference Perturbation Theory: The N-Electron Valence State
Approach. Theor. Chem. Acc. 2007 ,117, 743−754.
(383) Zgid, D.; Ghosh, D.; Neuscamman, E.; Chan, G. K.-L. A Study
of Cumulant Approximations to N-Electron Valence Multireference
Perturbation Theory. J. Chem. Phys. 2009 ,130, 194107.
(384) Kong, L.; Valeev, E. F. Perturbative Correction for the Basis
Set Incompleteness Error of Complete-Active-Space Self-ConsistentField. J. Chem. Phys. 2010 ,133, 174126.
(385) Torheyden, M.; Valeev, E. F. Universal Perturbative Explicitly
Correlated Basis Set Incompleteness Correction. J. Chem. Phys. 2009 ,
131, 171103.(386) McArdle, S.; Jones, T.; Endo, S.; Li, Y.; Benjamin, S.; Yuan, X.
Variational Quantum Simulation of Imaginary Time Evolution. 2018,
arXiv:1804.03023 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.03023 .
(387) Babbush, R.; Love, P. J.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Adiabatic Quantum
Simulation of Quantum Chemistry. Sci. Rep. 2015 ,4, 6603.
(388) Smirnov, A. Y.; Savel ’ev, S.; Mourokh, L. G.; Nori, F.
Modelling Chemical Reactions Using Semiconductor Quantum Dots.
Europhys. Lett. 2007 ,80, 67008.
(389) Torrontegui, E.; Ruschhaupt, A.; Gue ́ry-Odelin, D.; Muga, J.
G. Simulation of Quantum Collinear Chemical Reactions With
Ultracold Atoms.
J. Phys. B: At., Mol. Opt. Phys. 2011 ,44, 195302.
(390) Georgescu, I. M.; Ashhab, S.; Nori, F. Quantum Simulation.
Rev. Mod. Phys. 2014 ,86, 153−185.
(391) Perdomo-Ortiz, A.; Dickson, N.; Drew-Brook, M.; Rose, G.;
Aspuru-Guzik, A. Finding Low-Energy Conformations of Lattice
Protein Models by Quantum Annealing. Sci. Rep. 2012 ,2, 571.
(392) Babbush, R.; Perdomo-Ortiz, A.; O ’Gorman, B.; Macready,
W.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. In Advances in Chemical Physics ; Rice, S. A.,
Dinner, A. R., Eds.; Wiley-Blackwell, 2014; Vol. 155; Chapter 5, pp
201−244.
(393) Kempe, J.; Kitaev, A.; Regev, O. The Complexity of the Local
Hamiltonian Problem. SIAM J. Comput. 2006 ,35, 1070−1097.
(394) Cao, Y.; Babbush, R.; Biamonte, J.; Kais, S. Hamiltonian
Gadgets With Reduced Resource Requirements. Phys. Rev. A: At.,
Mol., Opt. Phys. 2015 ,91, 012315.
(395) Barkoutsos, P. K.; Moll, N.; Staar, P. W. J.; Mueller, P.;
F u h r e r ,A . ;F i l i p p ,S . ;T r o y e r ,M . ;T a v e r n e l l i ,I .F e r m i o n i cHamiltonians for Quantum Simulations: A General Reduction
Scheme. 2017, arXiv:1706.03637 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/
1706.03637 .
(396) Clements, W. R.; Renema, J. J.; Eckstein, A.; Valido, A. A.;
Lita, A.; Gerrits, T.; Nam, S. W.; Kolthammer, W. S.; Huh, J.;
Walmsley, I. A. Approximating Vibronic Spectroscopy With ImperfectQuantum Optics. J. Phys. B: At., Mol. Opt. Phys. 2018 ,51, 245503.
(397) Sparrow, C.; Martín-Lo ́pez, E.; Maraviglia, N.; Neville, A.;
Harrold, C.; Carolan, J.; Joglekar, Y. N.; Hashimoto, T.; Matsuda, N.;
O’Brien, J. L.; Tew, D. P.; Laing, A. Simulating the Vibrational
Quantum Dynamics of Molecules Using Photonics. Nature 2018 ,557,
660−667.
(398) Shen, Y.; Lu, Y.; Zhang, K.; Zhang, J.; Zhang, S.; Huh, J.; Kim,
K. Quantum Optical Emulation of Molecular Vibronic SpectroscopyUsing a Trapped-Ion Device. Chem. Sci. 2018 ,9, 836−840.
(399) Olivares, D. G.; Peropadre, B.; Huh, J.; García-Ripoll, J. J.
Quantum Emulation of Molecular Force Fields: A Blueprint for aSuperconducting Architecture. Phys. Rev. Appl. 2017 ,8, No. 064008.
(400) Sawaya, N. P. D.; Huh, J. Quantum Algorithm for Calculating
Molecular Vibronic Spectra. 2018, arXiv:1812.10495 [quant-ph];
https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.10495 .
(401) McArdle, S.; Mayorov, A.; Shan, X.; Benjamin, S.; Yuan, X.
Quantum Computation of Molecular Vibrations. 2018,
arXiv:1811.04069 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.04069 .
(402) Joshi, S.; Shukla, A.; Katiyar, H.; Hazra, A.; Mahesh, T. S.
Estimating Franck-Condon Factors Using an NMR Quantum
Processor. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 2014 ,90, 022303.
(403) Teplukhin, A.; Kendrick, B. K.; Babikov, D. Calculation of
Molecular Vibrational Spectra on a Quantum Annealer. 2018,
arXiv:1812.05211 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.05211 .
(404) Eckhardt, R. Stan Ulam, John Von Neumann, and the Monte
Carlo Method. Los Alamos Sci. 1987 ,15, 30.
(405) Motta, M.; Ye, E.; McClean, J. R.; Li, Z.; Minnich, A. J.;
Babbush, R.; Kin-Lic Chan, G. Low Rank Representations for
Quantum Simulation of Electronic Structure. 2018, arXiv:1808.02625
[physics.comp-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.05211 .
(406) Johnson, P. D.; Romero, J.; Olson, J.; Cao, Y.; Aspuru-Guzik,
A. QVECTOR: An Algorithm for Device-Tailored Quantum Error
Correction. 2017, arXiv:1711.02249 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/
abs/1711.02249 .Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510914


--- PAGE 60 ---
(407) O ’Brien, T. E.; Tarasinski, B.; Terhal, B. M. Quantum Phase
Estimation of Multiple Eigenvalues for Small-Scale (Noisy) Experi-ments. New J. Phys. 2019 ,21, No. 023022.
(408) Rigetti 8q-Agave , V.2.0.0.dev0, 2018; https:www.rigetti.com/
qpu(accessed Nov 5, 2018).
(409) IBM Q 5 Tenerife , V1.1.0, 2018; https://github.com/Qiskit/
ibmq-device-information/tree/master/backends/tenerife/V1 (ac-
cessed Nov 5, 2018).
(410) Havlicek, V.; Co ́rcoles, A. D.; Temme, K.; Harrow, A. W.;
Kandala, A.; Chow, J. M.; Gambetta, J. M. Supervised Learning With
Quantum Enhanced Feature Spaces. 2018, arXiv:1804.11326 [quant-
ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.11326 .
(411) Khatri, S.; LaRose, R.; Poremba, A.; Cincio, L.; Sornborger, A.
T.; Coles, P. J. Quantum-Assisted Quantum Compiling. 2018,arXiv:1807.00800 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.00800 .
(412) Smith, R. S.; Curtis, M. J.; Zeng, W. J. A Practical Quantum
Instruction Set Architecture. 2016, arXiv:1608.03355 [quant-ph];
https://arxiv.org/abs/1608.03355 .
(413) QISKit , 2018; https://github.com/QI SKit/qiskit-sdk-py
(accessed Nov 5, 2018).
(414) Steiger, D. S.; Ha ̈ner, T.; Troyer, M. ProjectQ: An Open
Source Software Framework for Quantum Computing. Quantum
2018 ,2, 49.
(415) Smelyanskiy, M.; Sawaya, N. P. D.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.
qHiPSTER: The Quantum High Performance Software TestingEnvironment. 2016, arXiv:1601.07195 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/
abs/1601.07195 .
(416) Cirq: A Python Framework for Creating, Editing, and Invoking
Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum (NISQ) Circuits , 2018; https://
github.com/quantumlib/Cirq (accessed Nov 5, 2018).
(417) Killoran, N.; Izaac, J.; Quesada, N.; Bergholm, V.; Amy, M.;
Weedbrook, C. Strawberry Fields: Full-Stack Python Library for
Designing, Simulating, and Optimizing Continuous Variable Quantum
Optical Circuits , 2018; https://github.com/XanaduAI/
strawberry ﬁelds(accessed Nov 5, 2018).
(418) Mueck, L. Quantum Reform. Nat. Chem. 2015 ,7, 361−363.
(419) Rigetti, C.; Alidoust, N. The Rigetti Quantum Advantage
Prize, https://medium.com/rigetti/the -rigetti-quantum-advantage-
prize-8976492c5c64 , 2018 (accessed Nov 5, 2018).
(420) Barends, R.; et al. Superconducting Quantum Circuits at the
Surface Code Threshold for Fault Tolerance. Nature 2014 ,508, 500−
503.
(421) Linke, N. M.; Maslov, D.; Roetteler, M.; Debnath, S.; Figgatt,
C . ;L a n d s m a n ,K .A . ;W r i g h t ,K . ;M o n r o e ,C .E x p e r i m e n t a l
Comparison of Two Quantum Computing Architectures. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2017 ,114, 3305−3310.
(422) Yoder, T. J.; Kim, I. H. The Surface Code With a Twist.
Quantum 2017 ,1,2 .
(423) Davidson, E. R.; Feller, D. Basis Set Selection for Molecular
Calculations. Chem. Rev. 1986 ,86, 681−696.
(424) Dunning, T. H., Jr Gaussian Basis Sets for Use in Correlated
Molecular Calculations. I. The Atoms Boron Through Neon and
Hydrogen. J. Chem. Phys. 1989 ,90, 1007−1023.
(425) Weigend, F.; Ahlrichs, R. Balanced Basis Sets of Split Valence,
Triple Zeta Valence and Quadruple Zeta Valence Quality for H to Rn:Design and Assessment of Accuracy. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2005 ,7,
3297−3305.
(426) Jorge, F.; Sagrillo, P.; de Oliveira, A. Gaussian Basis Sets of 5
Zeta Valence Quality for Correlated Wave Functions. Chem. Phys.
Lett. 2006 ,432, 558−563.
(427) Thakkar, A. J.; Koga, T.; Saito, M.; Hoffmeyer, R. E. Double
and Quadruple Zeta Contracted Gaussian Basis Sets for HydrogenThrough Neon. Int. J. Quantum Chem. 1993 ,48, 343−354.
(428) Widmark, P.-O.; Malmqvist, P.-Å.; Roos, B. O. Density Matrix
Averaged Atomic Natural Orbital (ANO) Basis Sets for Correlated
Molecular Wave Functions. Theor. Chim. Acta 1990 ,77, 291−306.
(429) Zhong, S.; Barnes, E. C.; Petersson, G. A. Uniformly
Convergent N-Tuple- ζAugmented Polarized (N ZaP) Basis Setsfor Complete Basis Set Extrapolations. I. SelfConsistent Field
Energies. J. Chem. Phys. 2008 ,129, 184116.
(430) Jensen, F. Polarization Consistent Basis Sets: Principles. J.
Chem. Phys. 2001 ,115, 9113−9125.
(431) Jensen, F. Atomic Orbital Basis Sets. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.:
Comput. Mol. Sci. 2013 ,3, 273−
295.
(432) Nagy, B.; Jensen, F. Reviews in Computational Chemistry ; Wiley
Online Library, 2017; Chapter 3.
(433) Havlíc ̌ek, V.; Troyer, M.; Whitfield, J. D. Operator Locality in
the Quantum Simulation of Fermionic Models. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol.,
Opt. Phys. 2017 ,95, 032332.
(434) Fenwick, P. M. A New Data Structure for Cumulative
Frequency Tables. Softw. Pract. Exp. 1994 ,24, 327−336.
(435) Setia, K.; Bravyi, S.; Mezzacapo, A.; Whit ﬁeld, J. D. Superfast
Encodings for Fermionic Quantum Simulation. 2018,
arXiv:1810.05274 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.05274 .
(436) McClean, J. R. et al. OpenFermion: The Electronic Structure
Package for Quantum Computers. 2017, arXiv:1710.07629 [quant-ph]; https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.07629 .Chemical Reviews Review
DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00803
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 10856 −1091510915

