
--- PAGE 1 ---
A The Configuration Interaction Method: 
.dvances in Highly Correlated Approaches 
C. David Sherrillt and Henry F. Schaefer I11 
Center for Computational Quantum Chemistry 
University of Georgia 
Athens, Georgia 30602 
Abstract 
Highly correlated configuration interaction (CI) wavefunctions going 
beyond the simple singles and doubles (CISD) model space can provide 
very reliable potential energy surfaces, describe electronic excited states, 
and yield benchmark energies and molecular properties for use in cali- 
brating more approximate methods. Unfortunately, such wavefunctions 
are also notoriously difficult to evaluate due to their extreme computa- 
tional demands. The dimension of a full CI procedure, which represents 
the exact solution of the electronic Schrodinger equation for a fixed 
one-particle basis set, grows factorially with the number of electrons 
and basis functions. For very large configuration spaces, the number 
of CI coupling coefficients becomes prohibitively large to store on disk; 
these coefficients must be evaluated as needed in a so-called direct CI 
procedure. Work done by several groups since 1980 has focused on using 
Slater determinants rather than spin (S2) eigenfunctions because cou- 
pling coefficients ul~ easier to compute with the former. We review the 
fundamentals of the conilguration interaction method and discuss var- 
ious determinant-based CI algorithms. Additionally, we consider some 
applications of highly correlated CI methods. 
t Present address: Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, CA 
94720-1460 
ADVANCES IN QUANTUM CHEMISTRY, VOLUME 34 
Copynght (3 1999 by Academic Press. All righis of reproduction in any form reserved 
W65-3216/99 130.W 143 

--- PAGE 2 ---
144 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
Contents 
1 Introduction 
2 The Configuration Interaction Method 
2.1 Fundamentals 
2.2 The Variational Theorem 
2.2.1 
2.2.2 The Correlation Energy 
Matrix Elements in Terms of One- and Two-electron Integrals 
2.3.1 Slater’s Rules 
2.3.2 Second Quantization 
Reducing the Size of the CI Space 
2.4.1 Truncating by Excitation Level 
2.4.2 Multireference Configuration Interaction 
2.4.3 Other CI Selection Schemes 
2.4.4 The First-Order Interacting Space 
2.4.5 Computational Scaling 
2.4.6 Size Extensivity Corrections 
2.4.7 The F’rozen Core Approximation The Method of Linear Variations 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 Choice of Orbitals 
2.6 Excited Electronic States 
3 Common Features of Implementations 
3.1.1 One-electron Integrals 
3.1.2 Two-electron Integrals 
3.2 Iterative Techniques for Solving Hc = Ec 
3.2.1 Davidson’s Method 
3.2.2 Olsen’s Method 3.1 Integral Transformation 
4 Determinant-Based Algorithms for Highly Correlated CI 
4.1 Slater Determinants, CSFs, and Direct CI 
4.2 Alpha and Beta Strings 
4.3 The Vectorized Full CI Algorithm of Knowles and Handy 
4.4 Olsen’s String-Based Full CI Algorithm 
4.4.1 Full CI Equations. 
4.4.2 Simplifications for M, = 0 
4.4.3 Algorithms for Computing cr 
4.5 Zarrabian’s Reduced Intermediate Space 
4.6 The Table-Based Algorithm of Bendazzoli and Evangelisti 
4.7 Approximate Full CI Methods 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 145 
4.8 Restricted Active Space CI 
4.8.1 RAS CI 0 Equations 
4.8.2 Algorithms for Computing (T 
4.8.3 
4.9.1 
4.9.2 
4.9.3 
4.9.4 String Replacement Lists 
4.9.5 Beyond RAS: More Flexible a priori CI Space Selectiov 
Graphical Representation of Alpha and Beta Strings 
Nongraphical Methods for String Addressing 
Example of CI Vector and String Addressing 
Algorithms for 02 and (~3 Used by DETCI 4.9 Implementation of Determinant-Based Algorithms 
5 Applications of Highly Correlated CI 
5.1 Full CI 
5.2 Second-Order CI 
5.3 Restricted Active Space CI 
5.4 CISDTQ and CISD[TQ] 

--- PAGE 4 ---
146 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
1 Introduction 
Most chemists picture the electronic structure of atoms or molecules by invok- 
ing orbitals. The orbital concept has its basis in Hartree-Fock theory, which 
determines the best wavefunction IQ) under the approximation that each elec- 
tron experiences only the average field of the other electrons. This is also called 
the “one-electron,” or “independent particle” model. While the Hartree-Fock 
method gives very useful results in many situations, it is not always quantita- 
tively or even qualitatively correct. When this approximation fails, it becomes 
necessary to include the effects of electron correlation: one must model the in- 
stantaneous electron-electron repulsions present in the molecular Hamiltonian. 
The most broadly applicable method for describing electron correlation is 
configuration interaction (CI), which expresses the wavefuxlction as a linear 
combination of Sz eigenfunctions (Slater determinants) or Sz and S2 eigen- 
functions (configuration state functions, or CSFs) describing the distribution 
of N electrons. If all possible N-electron functions are included in the CI proce- 
dure (subject to spatial and spin symmetry restrictions), then the Schrodinger 
equation is solved exactly within the space spanned by the one-particle basis 
functions. Hence, in its most general form, CI applies to difficult cases such 
as excited states, open-shell systems, and systems far from their equilibrium 
geometries. However, the dimension of this “full CI” procedure grows factori- 
ally with molecular size, so it is necessary to select only the most important 
N-electron functions. 
A common approach is to restrict the CI space to the Hartree-Fock self- 
consistent-field (SCF) configuration and those configurations related to it by 
single and double substitutions of orbitals, in a procedure denoted CISD. 
In cases where the SCF method yields a good approximate wavefunction, 
CISD with double-c plus polarization (DZP) single-particle basis sets typ- 
ically predicts equilibrium bond lengths of small molecules within 0.4% of 
experiment and harmonic vibrational frequencies within 4%.’ Unfortunately, 
CISD (and most other standard CI methods short of full CI) are not size 
extensive, meaning that their performance degrades with increasing molecu- 
lar size. Size extensive alternatives include many-body perturbation theory 
(MBPT) and coupled-cluster (CC) methods. The coupled-cluster singles and 
doubles (CCSD) method outperforms CISD with only a moderately increased 
computational effort (the cost of both methods scales as the sixth power of 
the system size) because CCSD accounts for some triple and quadruple sub- 
stitutions from the SCF configuration by approximating them as products of 
single and double substitutions.. When employed with a trip1e-C plus dou- 
ble polarization basis set (TZBP), the CCSD generally predicts bond lengths 
within 0.2% of experiment and harmonic vibrational frequencies within 2%.2 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 147 
More accurate results can be obtained by using larger one-particle basis sets 
and employing the CCSD(T) method, which accounts for the effects of irre- 
ducible (or connected) triple substitutions in a single non-iterative step scaling 
as n7 .3-5 Furthermore, recent equation-of-motion (EOM) or linear-response 
coupled-cluster theories for singly-excited electronic also outperform 
CISD in the prediction of excitation energies because CISD is biased towards 
the state described by the reference wavefunction. 
Even the coupled-cluster methods eventually break down in cases where 
the SCF wavefunction is not a qualitatively correct description of the system. 
This can occur during bond-breaking reactions, for example, or for transition 
 metal^.^^^ Hence, it is necessary to make the zeroth-order wavefunction mul- 
ticonfigurational. Although multireference coupled-cluster theories are very 
difficult to formulate, multireference CI methods have been used for many 
years. loill These methods typically include single and double substitutions 
from a set of “reference” configurations required to describe nondynamical 
electron correlation. Unfortunately, reference selection is not trivial, since the 
list of important references depends on the molecule and its geometry. This 
tends to make MR-CI methods unsuitable as a “model chemistry,”12 since the 
quality of the wavefunction is not uniform across different molecules. One MR- 
CI wavefunction which is largely free from these difficulties is second-order CI 
(SOCI),13 which is a multi-reference CISD in which the references are chosen 
as all possible distributions of electrons within a given “active space” (unfor- 
tunately, the acronym SOCI is also sometimes used to mean spin-orbit CI). 
The SOCI wavefunction requires much less computational effort than a full CI, 
yet it produces potential energy surfaces which nearly parallel the full CI sur- 
face~.’“’~ If the active space is large enough, one can expect the SOCI method 
to provide equally good results for any small molecule at any geometry, making 
it a suitable model chemistry (SOCI is still not rigorously size extensive, so it 
may be necessary to apply size extensivity corrections for systems with eight 
electrons or morel5). Unfortunately, the SOCI method is too computationally 
expensive to be generally applicable. 
Hence there is a need to make SOCI more computationally efficient so that 
it can be used for larger chemical systems, and to develop related methods 
which scale better with the system size. Although the CI space can be reduced 
by individual selection of references or N-electron functions, for the reasons 
stated above it is beneficial to select the CI space in an a priori manner, once 
a minimal set of parameters, such as the active space, has been specified. 
For example, we have advocated a method we call CISD[TQ],16-18 which is a 
SOCI in which higher-than-quadruple substitutions have been excluded. For 
systems dominated by a single reference, CISD[TQ] performs nearly as well as 
soc1.16~7 

--- PAGE 6 ---
148 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
Although extremely costly to determine, full CI results are invaluable in 
the calibration of such Gultireference CI methods, or indeed of essentially any 
ab initio electronic structure method, including many-body perturbation the- 
ory (MBPT) lSz3 and coupled-cluster approa~hes.~*~1~* 17119922124-37 A few full 
CI  benchmark^'^^^^^^^ have been carried out using the loopdriven graphical 
unitary group (LD-GUGA) CI'approa~h,~~~ which uses a spin eigenfunction, 
or CSF, basis. However, a majority of the full CI calculations to date have 
employed Slater determinants, even though this typically makes the CI vector 
2-4 times longer. In 1980, Handy demonstrated that the benefits of Slater 
determinants can outweigh their disadvantages, primarily because the evalua- 
tion of the required matrix elements becomes so much ~impler.4~ In his 1980 
article, Handy introduced the alpha and beta string notation which has com- 
monly been used in the development of new CI algorithms. After an important 
reformulation of the direct CI method by Siegbahn,45 Knowles and Handy in- 
troduced a vectorized full CI algorithm that enabled a whole series of full CI 
benchmark studies by Bauschlicher, Langhoff, Taylor, and others.15 In 1988, 
Olsen and co-workers showed how to improve the Knowles-Handy algorithm by 
reducing the operation count while still maintaining vectorization in the inner- 
most Another important advance was the extension to certain types 
of truncated CI spaces in which determinants are chosen according to how 
many electrons they place in each of three orbital subspaces. This restricted 
active space (MS) CI procedure is capable of evaluating SOCI and CISD[TQ] 
wavefunctions. Subsequently, other full CI algorithms involving basically the 
same amount of computational effort as Olsen's algorithm have been presented 
by Harrison and Zar~-abian~~ and by Bendazzoli and E~angelisti.~~"~ 
In this article, we provide an updated look at the configuration interaction 
method in general, and at highly correlated CI methods in particular. Spe- 
cial emphasis is given to methods which select the CI space in an a pn'ori 
manner. After reviewing the basic theory of the CI method and the typical 
approximations employed, we discuss features common to all implementations: 
transformation of the one- and two-electron integrals from the atomic orbital 
to the molecular orbital basis, and iterative diagonalization methods. Next, 
we survey several determinant-based algorithms for full and RAS CI wavefunc- 
tions. We describe some technical issues in considerable detail and describe our 
experience with our own determinant-based CI program. Finally, we discuss 
some of the applications of highly correlated CI methods. Although crucial 
to the efficient determination of optimized geometries and vibrational frequen- 
cies, analytic gradients of CI wavefunctions are not discussed in this article; 
we refer the reader to the recent article by Shepard51 and the monograph by 
Yamaguchi et al.52 Furthermore, additional considerations may arise when 
designing a CI program to be used along with orbital optimization in the mul- 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 149 
ticonfigurational (MC) or complete-active-space (CASJ SCF methods; these 
issues are discussed el~ewhere.~?~~-~~ 
2 The Configuration Interaction Method 
This section presents the essential elements of the configuration interaction 
method and is meant to be accessible to those who are not experts in CI. 
The classic review by Shavitt covers the theoretical fundamentals and various 
formulations given prior to 1977.57 More recent reviews have been presented 
by Siegbahr~,~~ Karwo~ski,~~ and Duch.“ 
2.1 Fundamentals 
Configuration interaction is conceptually the simplest method for solving the 
time-independent electronic Schrodinger equation HIQ) = El Q) under the 
Born-Oppenheimer approximation. The electronic wavefunction IS) is ap- 
proximated by a linear expansion of N-electron basis functions (where N is 
the number of electrons in the system), i.e., 
The linear expansion coefficients CI are the CI coeficients. Substituting this 
linear expansion into the electronic Schrodinger equation, one obtains61 a ma- 
trix form more suitable for computation: 
HC = ESC, (2) 
where the Hamiltonian operator H has been replaced by a matrix H and the 
CI wavefunction 19) has been replaced by a column vector of coefficients c. 
In principle, this “matrix mechanics” formulation is equivalent to the original 
electronic Schrodinger equation;62 hence it is said that CI constitutes an “exact 
theory.” In practice, however, the matrix equations are not exact because the 
expansion in equation (1) must be truncated to a finite number of terms. The 
matrix elements of the Hamiltonian are given by HI., = (@~[fil@~) and S is 
the overlap matrix with elements SIJ = (@I/@.,). If orthonormal functions 
l@I) are used for the expansion, then of course S becomes the unit matrix 
and the equation becomes an eigenvalue equation. Since €3 is a Hermitian 
matrix, the number of orthogonal eigenvectors is equal to the dimension of the 
matrix. The lowest-energy solution represents the electronic ground state, and 
higher-energy solutions represent excited electronic states. 
It is generally helpful to build into the expansion functions {[@I)} the 
symmetry properties of the system. According to the antisymmetry principle, 

--- PAGE 8 ---
150 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
a wavefunction describing a system of electrons (more generally, fermions) 
must be antisymmetric with respect to the interchange of spatial and spin 
coordinates for any pair of electrons. This requirement is very commonly 
satisfied by making the expansion functions Slater determinants. A Slater 
determinant in which the one-electron functions q5i, 41j,. . . , r$k are occupied 
may be written 
and abbreviated as IdJ&. . . q5k) or simply as [ij . . . k). Note that this determi- 
nant is uniquely specified (up to a phase factor) by the list of occupied orbitals. 
It is easy to see that such a determinant satisfies the antisymmetry principle, 
since the interchange of coordinates for a pair of electrons translates to the 
swapping of rows of the determinant, which introduces a sign change. We may 
also write the above determinant as 
where P is a permutation of electron coordinates with sign (-1)P. In this 
context it can be useful to define the antisymmetrizer as 
This operator produces a Slater determinant when applied to a simple product 
of spin orbitals. The antisymmetrizer is Hermitian, it commutes with H, and 
its square is proportional to itself, i.e., d2 = md. 
An electronic wavefunction can be described exactly by equation (1) if the 
expansion includes all possible Slater determinants formed froin a complete 
set of one-electron functions {$}.63 Such a procedure has been called complete 
C1.4D Since a truly complete set of orbitals will typically be infinite, a complete 
CI is technically impossible to perform. However, if the one-electron basis set 
is truncated, then only a finite (albeit large) number of Slater determinants 
can be formed. Using all of these determinants in the expansion constitutes a 
full CI procedure, and the resulting eigenfunctions and eigenvalues are exact 
within the space spanned by the one-electron basis set. Although full CI 
results are extremely costly to compute, they are essential for benchmarking 
more approximate methods. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 151 
It is straightforward to show that if the exact wavefunction I@) is an eigen- 
function of some Hermitian operator A, then expansion functions I@I) which 
are eigenfunctions of A with different eigenvalues do not contribute to the CI 
wavefunction and can be neglected in the expansion (1). If the Slater de- 
terminants are formed from spin-orbitals which are eigenfunctions of 6, and 
spatial symmetry operators, then the Slater determinants themselves will also 
be eigenfunctions of these spatial symmetry operators and of Sz. However, a 
Slater determinant is not generally an eigenfunction of S2. Hence, a common 
alternative to Slater determinants are configurutzon state functions (CSFs), 
which are simply linear combinations of Slater determinants chosen to be 
eigenfunctions of S2. The benefit of using CSFs over determinants is that 
fewer N-electron functions are needed to describe the same state. The draw- 
back is that matrix elements of the Hamiltonian are easier to compute using 
determinants. Of course, there are other possible choices for the N-electron 
basis functions. For instance, one can incorporate functions of two electrons 
(geminal~),~~”~ as is done in the Hylleraas treatment of the helium at~rn.~~,~’ 
Nevertheless, N-electron functions built, from single-particle functions remain 
the most common. 
Unfortunately, even with an incomplete one-electron basis, a full CI is 
computationally intractable for any but the smallest systems, due to the vast 
number of N-electron basis functions required (the size of the CI space is 
discussed in section 2.4.1). The CI space must be reduced, hopefully in such a 
way that the approximate CI wavefunction and energy are as close as possible 
to the exact values. By far the most common approximation is to begin with 
the Hartree-Fock procedure, which determines the best single-configuration 
approximation to the wavefunction that can be formed from a given basis 
set of one-electron orbitals (usually atom centered and hence called atomic 
orbitals, or AOs). This yields a set of molecular orbitals (MOs) which are 
linear combinat,ions of the AOs: 
where xp(xl) denotes an atomic orbital and Ci is an SCF coeficient. The 
CI space can then be expanded according to substitution or “excitation” level 
relative to the SCF “reference” determinant, i.e., 
where I@:) means the Slater determinant formed by replacing spin-orbital i 
in I@o) with spin orbital a, etc. The widely-employed CI singles and doubles 
(CISD) wavefunction includes only those N-electron basis functions which rep- 
resent single or double substitutions relative to the reference state. Since the 

--- PAGE 10 ---
152 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
Hamiltonian operator includes only one- and two-electron terms, only singly 
and doubly substituted configurations can interact directly with the reference, 
and they typically account for about 95% of the basis set correlation energy of 
small molecules at their equilibrium geometrie~,~~ where I@o) provides a good 
zeroth-order description. Truncation of the CI space according to excitation 
class is discussed more fully in section 2.4.1. 
2.2 The Variational Theorem 
One attractive feature of configuration interaction is that the computed lowest 
energy eigenvalue is always an upper bound to the exact ground state energy. 
This follows from the fact that the CI energy is given by the expectation value 
formula, or Rayleigh quotient, 
The variational theorem may be proven by expressing the approximate wave- 
function I@) as a linear combination of the exact eigenvectors IQJ; one easily 
obtains 
E - €0 = C c:c~(€, - €a), (9) 
2 
where €, is the ith exact energy eigenvalue, i.e., filqz) = €JQZ). Since the 
right-hand side of eq. (9) is necessarily non-negative, E 2 €0. Likewise, we can 
also insert an expansion over the exact eigenvectors for a given one-electron 
space to prove that the CI energy must be an upper bound to the full CI 
energy in the same one-electron basis set. Equation (9) demonstrates that the 
approximate wavefunction approaches the exact one (cg M 1) as the energy E 
is minimized (see section 2.2.1). Minimizing E is equivalent to minimizing the 
right-hand side of eq. (9); that is, the sum of squares of the absolute values 
of the coefficients of excited states is minimized with weight factors (E, - E0). 
This means that other properties do not generally converge as quickly with CI 
space expansion as the energy. In fact, the error in the energy is quadratic in 
the wavefunction error. This can be shown by writing the energy as 
(10) (Q - AQlfilQ - AQ) E= (Q - AQI* - AQ) ' 
with I@) the exact wavefunction and the error lAQ) chosen orthogonal to IQ). 
From this expression it is simple to demonstrate that all terms linear in IAQ) 
are vanishing and that only quadratic terms remain. 
It is easy to extend proofs of the variational theorem to the case of states 
which are the lowest roots of a given spatial and spin ~ymrnetry.~' Since the 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 153 
self-consistent-field (SCF) and multiconfigurational SCF (MCSCF) wavefunc- 
tions can be written as a linear expansion (1) containing one or a few Slater 
determinants, with an energy given by eq. (8), they also obey the variational 
theorem. Furthermore, just as the lowest CI eigenvalue is an upper bound to 
the exact ground-state energy, more generally any CI eigenvalue Ei is an upper 
bound to the corresponding exact excited state energy &i.71 Additionally, as 
other N-electron basis functions are added to the CI space, the eigenvalues 
obey the MacDonald-Hylleraas-Undheim relations7l? 72 
where rn is the number of N-electron basis functions. 
2.2.1 The Method of Linear Variations 
Since the variational theorem proves that the energy of a CI wavefunction is 
always an upper bound to the exact energy, one might start simply from the 
linear expansion (1) and attempt to minimize the energy by varying the CI 
coefficients subject to the constraint that they remain normalized. It is easy 
to show63 that this method of linear variations, or the Ritz method,73 yields 
the matrix equation 
That is, the method of linear variations is identical to the matrix formulation 
of the Schrodinger equation. Another way of viewing this result is that only 
solutions to eq. (12) are energetically stable with respect to variations in the 
linear expansion coefficients. HC = ESc. (12) 
2.2.2 The Correlation Energy 
Since the CI energy is always an upper bound to the exact energy, approximate 
CI methods can be judged according to what fraction of the correlation energy 
they recover. The correlation energy is defined as the difference between the 
energy in the Hartree-Fock limit ( EHF) and the exact nonrelativistic energy 
of a system (€") 
= €0 - EH F. 
This energy will always be negative because the Hartree-Fock energy is an 
upper bound to the exact energy. The exact nonrelativistic energy €0 could 
be calculated, in principle, via a full CI in a complete one-electron basis. If we 
have an incomplete one-electron basis set, then we can only compute the basis 
set correlation energy, which is the correlation energy for a given one-electron 
basis. Frequently the term correlation energy implies basis set correlation (13) 

--- PAGE 12 ---
154 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer Ill 
energy. The correlation energy is the energy recovered by fully allowing the 
electrons to avoid each other; the Hartree-Fock method, rather than using the 
true instantaneous Coulomb repulsion between pairs of electrons, instead only 
allows each electron to experience an average potential due to all the other 
electrons. However, this description of dynamical correlation is not complete. 
When a molecule is pulled apart, the electrons should not need to avoid each 
other as much, so the magnitude of the correlation energy should decrease. In 
fact, the opposite is true, as shown by the basis set correlation energies given 
in Table 1 for H20 at five different geometries. 
Table 1: Correlation Energy in H2O with a cc-pVDZ Basis as Both 0-H Bonds 
are Stretched Simultaneously. 
Geometry E,,,, (hartree)' 
Re -0.217 821 
1.5 . Re -0.269 961 
2.0 * R., -0.363 954 
2.5 * Re -0.476 747 
3.0 . Re -0.567 554 
'Data from Olsen et al., ref 22. 
All ten electrons are correlated. 
The magnitude of the correlation energy increases as the 0-H bonds are 
stretched beyond their equilibrium length because equation (13) also includes 
a more subtle effect called the nondynamical or static correlation energy. 
This part of the correlation energy reflects the inadequacy of a single refer- 
ence in describing a given molecular state, and is due to nearly degenerate 
states or rearrangement of electrons within partially filled shells. Sha~itt~~ has 
pointed out this deficiency in the correlation energy definition and has sug- 
gested that multiconfigurational Hartree-Fock may prove a more useful base- 
line than single-configuration Hartree-Fock in equation (13). 
2.3 Matrix Elements in Terms of One- and Two-electron 
Integrals 
2.3.1 Slater's Rules 
The matrix elements HIJ = (@~Ifil@J) can be expressed in terms of one- and 
two-electron integrals. If we employ Slater determinants, the matrix elements 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 155 
may be evaluated using Slater’s rules (also called the Slater-Condon r~les)~~-~~ 
if a common set of one-electron orbitals are used for all determinants and if 
these orbitals are orthonormal. If nonorthogonal orbitals are employed (e.g., 
atomic orbitals) then the more complicated Lowdin rules77 apply. 
Slater’s rules are expressed here in terms of spin-orbitals, which are func- 
tions of the spatial and spin coordinates of a single electron. The one-electron 
integrals are written as 
[ililj] = Sd:(Xl)i(Xl)dj(Xl)dXI (14) 
and the two-electron integrals, in Mulliken notation, are written as 
(15) 1 
r12 
Before Slater’s rules can be used, the two Slater determinants must be 
rearranged so that they have the maximum possible number of columns in 
common (recalling that each column swap causes a sign change). After the 
determinants are in maximum coincidence, we see how many spin orbitals they 
differ by and employ the following rules: [.ij Ikll = S 4; (XI )4J (x1) -4L(X2)*dI (X2)dXldX2. 
1. Identical Determinants: 
m i>j 
2. Determinants that Differ by One Spin Orbital: 
la1) = I...i...) 
la2) = I...j...) 
N 
(@1IfiI@2) = [ililj] + c {[ijlkk] - [iklkj]} 
k 
3. Determinants that Differ by Two Spin Orbitals: 
pP,) = I...ij.. .) (18) 
1@2) = I...kl...) 
(@lIfipz) = [ikljl] - [illjk]. 
Some of the terms above may vanish after integrating over spin coordinates, 
and a pair of determinants differing by more than two spin orbitals have a 
matrix element of zero. A derivation of these rules can be found in the intro- 
ductory text by Szabo and O~tlund.~~ The rules for evaluating Hamiltonian 
matrix elements in a CSF basis are more complicated and are generally de- 
78 using second quantization, which we consider next. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
156 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer Ill 
2.3.2 Second Quantization 
We are free to write the matrix elements in the more general form 
n 
(19) ln 
HIJ = c$:(pIh) + 2 C rL&(pqIrs), 
where the use of parentheses rather than square brackets denotes a switch to 
spatial orbital notation rather than spin orbital notation. Also note the factor 
of 112 in the two-electron term. The constants 7;; and FiiTs are called the one- 
and two-electron coupling coefficients, respectively. The CI energy in terms of 
these coupling coefficients is Pq PVS 
where we assume that the CI coefficients are real. The one- and two-electron 
reduced density matrices are defined as 
and using these definitions the energy may be written more compactly as 
Some authors absorb the factor of 112 into the definition of the two-electron 
coupling coefficient and reduced density matrix. 
These coupling coefficients are generally derived using second quantiza- 
ti~n,~~,~’ in which the Hamiltonian is written (for a given one-particle basis 
set) as 
P9 
where at and up are the creation and annihilation operators, respectively, for an 
electron in spin orbital p. Note that the second-quantized form of the Hamil- 
tonian is independent of the number of electrons. If the spatial parts of Q and 
p spin orbitals are identical, it is easy to re-write the second-quantized Hamil- 
tonian in terms of the following shift operators, which Paldus has shown4’ to 
be generators of the unitary group: 
E.. (25) - - + a!p3p. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 157 
Due to the anticommutation relations of creation and annihilation operators, 
The resulting Hamiltonian in terms of these operators is 
n 
(28) ln fi = hp9kp9 + 5 c(pqIrs) (fip9fiT5 - s97EpS) > 
P9 P9TS 
where we have used the more compact notation h,, = (plhlq). It is clear that 
the one- and two-electron coupling coefficients can be written as 
7;: = (@ll~p9lQJ), (29) 
rrJ P9Ts = (aflEpqET5 - h9TEpslaJ). (30) 
Furthermore, using equations (26) and (27), one can deduce the following: 
7;: = kg)* (31) 
r;iTS = rf;,, = (r;iqP)* = (rJf QPST )*. (32) 
2.4 
This section discusses strategies for reducing the number of N-electron basis 
functions in the CI space (given that, in the general case, it is impossible to 
include all of them). We have already discussed how N-electron functions with 
the wrong symmetry properties (e.g., point-group symmetry, or spin symme- 
try) can be dismissed immediately. Reducing the Size of the CI Space 
2.4.1 Truncating by Excitation Level 
As noted in equation (7), the CI expansion is typically truncated according to 
excitation level; in the vast majority of CI studies, the expansion is truncated 
(for computational tractability) at doubly-substituted configurations. Since 
the Hamiltonian contains only two-body terms, only singles and doubles can 
interact directly with the reference; this is a direct result of Slater’s rules (cf. 
section 2.3.1). Furthermore, the matrix elements of singly substituted deter- 
minants (or CSFs) with the reference are zero when canonical SCF orbitals are 
used, according to Brillouin’s theorem. Hence, one expects double excitations 
to make the largest contributions to the CI wavefunction after the reference 

--- PAGE 16 ---
158 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
state. Indeed, this is what is observed. Even though singles, triples, etc., 
do not interact directly with the reference, they can still become part of the 
CI wavefunction (i.e., have non-zero coefficients) because they mix with the 
doubles, directly or indirectly. Although singles are much less important to 
the energy than doubles, they are generally included in CI treatments because 
of their relatively small number and because of their greater importance in 
describing one-electron properties. 
After singles and doubles, the most important determinants are triples and 
quadruples, because only these can interact directly with the doubles. The 
importance of a determinant to the final CI wavefunction is expected to fall 
off with increasing substitution or excitation level relative to the reference, 
assuming that the reference is a reasonable zeroth-order description of the 
desired electronic state. Table 2 demonstrates the importance of various exci- 
tation classes in obtaining CI energies. Singles and doubles account for 95% 
of the correlation energy at the equilibrium geometries of the molecules listed. 
Quadruple excitations are more important than triples, at least as far as the 
energy is concerned. At stretched geometries, the CISD and CISDT methods 
become markedly poorer, yet the CISDTQ method still recovers a very high 
(and nearly constant) fraction of the correlation energy, suggesting that CIS- 
DTQ should give reliable results for energy differences across potential energy 
surfaces for small molecules so long as no more than two bonds are broken 
at once (simultaneously breaking three bonds would require up to sextuple 
substitutions). 
Table 3 demonstrates that the number of N-electron basis functions in- 
creases dramatically with increasing excitation level. A DZP basis should be 
considered the minimum adequate basis for a meaningful benchmark st~dy.'~~~~ 
While it is generally possible to perform CISD calculations on small molecules 
with a good one-electron basis, the CISDTQ method is limited to molecules 
containing very few heavy atoms, due to the extreme number of N-electron 
functions required. Full CI calculations are of course even more difficult to 
perform, so that despite their importance as benchmarks, few full CI energies 
using large one-electron basis sets have been obtained. 
The size of the full CI space in CSFs can be calculated (including spin 
symmetry but ignoring spatial symmetry) by Weyl's dimension formula.82 If 
N is the number of electrons, n is the number of orbitals, and S is the total 
spin, then the dimension of the CI space in CSFs is given by 
The dimension of the full CI space in determinants (again, ignoring spatial 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Configuration interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 159 
Table 2: Percentage of correlation energy recovered by various CI excitation 
levels for some small molecules. 
Percent Corr. Energy" 
Molecule CISD CISDT CISDTQ 
BH 94.91 n/a 99.97 
HF 95.41 96.49 99.86 
H: 96.36 96.87 99.96 
H20(Re) 94.48 95.85 99.85 
HzO(1.5 Re) 89.36 92.05 99.48 
HzO(2.0 Re) 80.21 84.59 98.40 
NH3 94.44 95.43 99.84 
"Results are for a DZP basis and are taken 
from refs 38 (BH, HF), 17 (H;), 22 (HzO), 
and 80 (NH3). HzO results correlate all ten 
electrons and employ the cc-pVDZ basis. 
Table 3: Number of CSFs required for small molecules at several levels of CI. 
CSFs required" 
Molecule CISD CISDT CISDTQ FCI 
BH 568 n/a 28 698 132 686 
HF 552 6 712 48 963 944348 
H: 1271 24 468 248 149 2 923 933 
H20 1311 27 026 332491 94 165 610 
NH3 2 443 52 595 619 235 48 642 057 
"Results are for a DZP basis and are taken from 
refs 38 (BH, HF), 17 (H;), 22 (H20), and 80 (NH3). 
H20 results correlate all ten electrons and employ 
the cc-pVDZ basis. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
I60 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
Table 4: Dimension of Full CI in Determinants (CSFs in parentheses) 
Number of electrons 
Orbitals 6 8 10 12 
10 14.4 lo3 44.1 x lo3 63.5 x 103 44.1 x 103 
(4.95 x lo3) (13.9 x lo3) (19.4 x lo3) (13.9 x lo3) 
20 1.30 x lo6 23.5 x lo6 240 x lo6 1.50 x lo’ 
(379 x lo3) (5.80 x lo6) (52.6 x lo6) (300 x lo6) 
30 16.5 x lo6 751 x lo6 20.3 x lo’ 353 x lo’ 
(4.56 x lo6) (172 x lo6) (4.04 x lo’) (62.5 x lo’) 
symmetry) is computed simply by 
or, in a form closer to equation (XI), 
n n 
DnNS = ( N/2 + S ) ( N/2 - S ) ’ (35) 
Table 4 shows the dimension of the full CI space (neglecting spatial symmetry) 
in determinants and in CSFs for closed-shell systems. Current full CI algo- 
rithms are typically limited to several million determinants. Although there 
have been reports of larger calculations (including more than a billion deter- 
minant~~~?’~), the computational expense is currently too great for routine 
calculations of this size. 
2.4.2 Multireference Configuration Interaction 
A full CI wavefunction is invariant to orbital rotations and even to the choice of 
the reference function. By contrast, the simple CISD method is quite sensitive 
to the choice of reference and orbitals. This explains the poor performance 
of CISD when the bonds are stretched in H20 (cf. Table 2): the SCF wave- 
function becomes an inadequate reference at stretched geometries, and CISD 
is unable to overcome this inadequacy. Such difficulties can occur even at 
equilibrium geometries if multiple low-lying electronic states are present. For 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 161 
example, the zeroth-order wavefunction for a singlet diradical often requires 
two electron configurations: one doubly occupies the MO formed from in-phase 
radical orbitals, while the other doubly occupies the out-of-phase MO. Another 
example is the Z: state of CH2, which also requires a two-configuration treat- 
ment: the two configurations correspond to the two choices for the lone pair of 
electrons, either in the molecular plane or perpendicular to it.85186 More than 
two configurations can be critical for transition metals or when multiple bonds 
are broken. 
If a CISD procedure includes all the important N-electron functions from 
the zeroth-order wavefunction (the “references”) and also the single and double 
substitutions for each of these references, then the resulting method is referred 
to as multireference (MR) CISD. The MR-CISD wavefunction may be written 
I@’MRCI) = 1 c(R)I@(R)) + 1 1 cT(R)I@?(R)) + 1 1 cy(R)I@y(R)), 
R n i~ R ijxy 
(36) 
where R denotes a reference function, and i,j (x, y) run over orbitals which 
are occupied (unoccupied) for a given R. Clearly, a determinant or CSF which 
is generated as a single or double substitution from one reference state might 
also be generated as a single or double from a different reference; only unique 
N-electron functions are included in the MR-CISD procedure. If a sufficient 
number of references are included, then a MR-CISD can provide results nearly 
as good as the full C114,15,87 at a dramatically reduced computational expense. 
In the MR-CI method, the set of orbitals which are occupied in any of the ref- 
erences constitutes the internal space, and all other orbitals are in the external 
space. Sometimes a further distinction is made among the internal space or- 
bitals: those whose occupancy is constant, for all references are called inactive 
(even though their electrons may he excited in the final wavefunction), and 
the rest are called active. In the direct CI method88 (see section 4), it is more 
convenient to rewrite (36) in an equivalent form which emphasizes the number 
of external orbitals: 
where a and b are external orbitals, and I, S, and P denote internal states 
(including spin coupling) with N, N - 1, and N - 2 electrons, respectively. 
One very straightforward, a priori selection scheme is to make references of 
all those N-electron functions which can be obtained by distributing electrons 
in all possible ways in a subset of the most important orbitals (the “active 
space”). This results in the second-order CI (SOCI),13 which is known’6~17,89 
to provide high-quality potential energy surfaces nearly parallel to those from a 
full CI. Unfortunately, this prescription typically produces too many references 

--- PAGE 20 ---
162 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
and the final CI space is too large to be computationally tractable. One 
strategy which has received relatively little attenti~n’~*~~~’’ is to approximate a 
SOCI by restricting the references according to their excitation level. It is often 
reasonable to assume,that the most important references are single and double 
substitutions from a dominant single referen~e.’~,’~,’’ Making this restriction 
leads to a MR-CISD which includes those triples and quadruples which have no 
more than two electrons outside the active space. This wavefunction has been 
designated CISD[TQ] to emphasize the variational treatment of limited triples 
and quadruples, and it has been shown to closely match SOCI when a single 
reference configuration dominates.’6-17 Although the CISD[TQ] expansion is 
much smaller than SOCI, it remains intractable for systems with more than 
two or three heavy atoms. Further strategies to reduce the cost of a CISD[TQ] 
are discussed later. 
A much more common procedure for reference selection is to accept refer- 
ences whose estimated importance is greater than some given threshold; this 
can involve perturbative estimates of a function’s energetic contribution or 
its coefficient in some preliminary wavefunction. These approaches are more 
successful at obtaining the best wavefunction at the lowest expense, but they 
sacrifice the simplicity of the excitation class selection and can become more 
difficult to implement and to use. One complication is that potential energy 
surfaces determined using such methods may not be smooth; to alleviate this, 
one may need to determine the important references at each geometry and use 
the union of these sets at every point. 
Discarding some of the single and double excitations is another way to re- 
duce the CI space. As with reference selection, the most common approaches 
involve estimates of a function’s energetic contribution or coefficient. The 
CIPSI method of Malrieu and co-workers selects determinants based on pertur- 
bation theory estimates of their coefficients in the first-order wavefuncti~n.~~~~~ 
Alternatively, Buenker and Peyerimhoff lo select spatial orbital configurations 
on the basis of each configuration’s energetic contribution to a small CI con- 
sisting only of the references and the CSFs formed from that configuration. 
Obviously this involves solving a very large number of small CI problems. 
Alternatively, one can estimate the importance of all configurations simul- 
taneously via a procedure such as Gershgorn and Shavitt’s Bk meth~d.’~>’~ 
Shavitt’s 1977 review article57 surveys these and related alternatives. 
Finally, Siegbahn has suggested two procedures for reducing the number 
of variational parameters in a MR-CISD wavefunction. The first method, 
externally contracted MR-CISD,88 expresses eq. (37) as 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 163 
= CCIIQI) + Ccsl@s) + CCPl@P), (38) 
I S P 
where the external contraction coefficients Ei and E$ are determined pertur- 
batively and the coefficients CI, cs, and cp are determined variationally; hence, 
this is a type of variational perturbation the~ry.~~-~' Note that the total num- 
ber of variational coefficients is now drastically reduced compared to eq. (37). 
Siegbahn states5' that the error in the correlation energy due to external con- 
traction is roughly 1-3%. 
An alternative contraction scheme which has received more attention is 
internally contracted multireference CISD (usually denoted simply CMRCI) , 
which was first discussed by Meyergg and Siegbahn."' This method applies the 
single and double excitation operators to a single multiconfigurational reference 
wavefunction as a whole, including the reference coefficients. Thus, if the 
reference wavefunction is 
IQo) = C cRIQR), (39) 
R 
then there are at least three other classes of expansion functions-singly ex- 
ternal, semi-internal, and doubly-external? 
I@:!) = fiazfikjI@O) = C dSl@:) (41) 
(42) S 
= (kazfibj + pfiajgbz)l@'o) = C dPl@.apb), 
P 
where p is +1 (-1) for singlet (triplet) coupling of a and b. The coefficients d 
are not variational parameters, but fixed linear combinations of the reference 
coefficients CR. The final wavefunction is then 
I@IC-MRCI) = cOl@O) + Ccpl@.,") + 1 '$I@$) + 1 (43) 
za zj ka wab 
Once again, the contraction has dramatically reduced the number of variational 
parameters. One difficulty with the internally contracted multireference CI 
method is that the relevant coupling coefficients become considerably more 
difficult to calculate. Werner and Knowles"' alleviate this problem by leaving 
internal and singly-external configurations uncontracted, i.e., 
The remaining coupling coefficients still require elements of the third and 
fourth order reduced density matrices, which can now be evaluated each time 

--- PAGE 22 ---
164 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer Ill 
they are required due to advances by Werner and Kno~les.~~>'~~ The con- 
traction error in the internally contracted MR-CISD method is generally only 
0.1-0.2~8 
2.4.3 Other CI Selection Schemes 
In 1988, Olsen and co-~orkers~~ presented the restricted active space (RAS) CI, 
which specifies the CI space in an a priori manner reminiscent of the second- 
order CI (SOCI) and its derivatives. Olsen partitions the orbitals into three 
subspaces, labeled RAS I, RAS 11, and R.4S 111. Typically, RAS I contains 
occupied and possibly very important virtual orbitals, RAS I1 contains the 
most important virtuals, and RAS I11 contains the less important virtuals. 
The CI space includes all determinants with a minimum of p electrons in RAS 
I and a maximum of q electrons in RAS 111. There is no restriction on RAS 
11, which is akin to the complete active space. Using this simple procedure, it 
is possible to formulate any CI space truncated according to excitation level 
(e.g., CISD, CISDT, etc.) as well as excitation class selected MR-CI spaces, 
such as SOCI and CISD[TQ]. The RAS CI method is discussed more fully in 
section 4.8. 
There are of course many other possible ways to select the CI space. For 
example, it is possible to generalize the RAS scheme to allow for more flexible 
CI spaces; work along these lines is presented later. In contrast, it is also 
possible to make the CI selection process essentially random. A recent paper 
by Greer discusses the unusual strategy of selecting CSFs using a Monte Carlo 
algorithm. lo3 
2.4.4 The First-Order Interacting Space 
Another way of limiting the size of the CI space is to include only those N- 
electron functions which contribute to the first-order wavefunction in Rayleigh- 
Schrodinger perturbation theory. This is the motivation behind the interacting 
space classification: the zeroth-order interacting space consists of the set of 
references, and the first order interacting space includes all those N-electron 
functions which have a nonzero Hamiltonian matrix element with some mem- 
ber of the zeroth-order interacting  pace.'^^-'^^ Similarly, it is possible to 
define n-th order interacting spaces as those functions having nonzero Hamil- 
tonian matrix elements with some member of the (n - 1)th order interacting 
space.lo6 Various methods for obtaining the first-order interacting space have 
been presented by Bunge,lo4 Schaefer and co-~orkers,~~~ lo5 and McLean and 
Liu."' 
The first-order interacting space restriction is generally used to reduce the 
number of double substitutions included in single- or multi-reference CISD 

--- PAGE 23 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 165 
wavefunctions. Although single substitutions from a Hartree-Fock reference 
determinant may be noninteracting due to Brillouin's theorem, they are of- 
ten included nevertheless because of their strong interaction with the doubles 
and their importance in describing one-electron properties. For closed shell 
systems, the first-order interacting space criterion is inconsequential because 
Slater's rules dictate that all double substitutions are interacting. However, 
for open-shell systems there can be CSFs whose spatial orbital configuration 
differs from the reference by two electrons but which are noninteracting be- 
cause of their spin coupling. In a basis of Slater determinants, one can enforce 
the first-order interacting space restriction simply by ensuring that all deter- 
minants differ from the reference by at most two spin orbitals. Aside from 
being more compact, wavefunctions limited to the first-order interacting space 
can exhibit certain orbital invariance properties.lo7 
2.4.5 Computational Scaling 
Depending on the relative sizes of the number of electrons, the number of or- 
bitals, and the excitation level, one can derive several different simple estimates 
of the computational cost of a configuration interaction procedure. Obviously 
that cost relates to the number of N-electron functions in the linear expan- 
sion of the wavefunction, and the size of the CI space for various methods has 
already been discussed in section 2.4.1. 
For present purposes, it is sufficient to work with spin orbitals. Typically, 
the dimension of the CI space is dominated by determinants with the highest 
excitation level, m. Thus 
with n, spin orbitals unoccupied in the reference. Most CI procedures solve 
only for the lowest or lowest few eigenvectors, via an iterative procedure 
(cf. section 3.2). In such situations, the scaling is much less than the O(N&) 
typical of standard matrix diagonalization methods. The most expensive step 
in iterative procedures such as the Davidson methodlo8 is the construction of 
the so-called u vectors, 
where b, belongs to a set of trial vectors which is expanded each iteration until 
convergence is reached. If the Hamiltonian matrix H were formed directly, 
this procedure would require O(N&,) operations. This is never actually done 
because the st,orage requirements would be too great, and such an approach 
ignores the fact that the Hamiltoriian contains only two-body terms, so that 
the majority of the matrix elements are zero. ut = Hb,, (46) 

--- PAGE 24 ---
166 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
Each element of a trial vector bi need only be multiplied by the nonzero 
elements of H. The Hamiltonian will connect a maximally excited determinant 
with other maximally excited determinants and with other determinants hav- 
ing excitation level m 2 m' 2 m - 2. The number of interacting determinants 
is roughly 
which we further approximate as 
1 1 -m2(nu + m)' + -m2(N - m)' + m2n,(N - m). 4 4 
Each element in bi must be multiplied by the relevant nonzero matrix elements, 
leading to an overall operation count on the order of (48) 
O(NmnY (m2nt + m2N2 + m'Nn,}). (49) 
Except for full CI, we typically expect N,nu >> m. Furthermore, we almost 
always have n, > N, so that the leading term becomes 
O( Nmng+m). (50) 
Thus the number of operations for a CISD procedure has a sixth power de- 
pendence on the total number of orbitals, while CISDTQ scales as the tenth 
power. For a given system, the number of occupied orbitals is fixed, and the 
cost of increasing the basis set size scales as O(nE+"); for CISD and CISDTQ, 
this scaling becomes O(nt) and O(nz), respectively. 
The scaling of a multireference CI procedure can be estimated by multi- 
plying the single-reference scaling by the number of references. The scaling 
of the CISD[TQ] method, for example, is roughly O(N4n:), since the number 
of references is roughly N2 if the active space is small relative to the external 
orbital space. For very high levels of excitation, including full CI, the number 
of interacting matrix elements for a given determinant becomes approximately 
N2n2, so that the computational cost becomes roughly 
OFC'(NdetN2n2), (51) 
where we have replaced the term Nmnr with the actual number of determi- 
nants, Ndet. For comparison, for n spatial orbitals the determinant full CI 
algorithm of Knowles and Handylog scales as O(Ndetn4), while the algorithm 
of Olsen et a1.46 and similar approaches scale as O(NdetN2(n - N/2)') for a 
closed-shell system. Although the exponents appearing in (51) are smaller 
than those in (50), it is important to remember that Ndet contains a facto- 
rial dependence on N and n (see section 2.4.1); hence, a full CI procedure is 
extremely demanding computationally. 

--- PAGE 25 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 167 
2.4.6 Size Extensivity Corrections 
If we truncate the CI (either in the one-electron or N-electron space), we no 
longer have an exact theory. Of course either of these truncations will introduce 
an error in the wavefunctiori, which will cause errors in the energy and all other 
properties. One particularly unwelcome result of truncating the N-electron 
basis is that CI energies are no longer size extensive or size consistent. 
These two terms-size extensive and size consistent-are used somewhat 
loosely in the literature. Of the two, size ext,eIisivity is the most well-defined. 
A method is said to be size extensive if the energy calculated thereby scales 
linearly with the number of particles N; the word “extensive” is used in the 
same sense as in thermodynamics. A method is called size consistent if it 
gives an energy E4 + EB for two well separated subsystems A and B. While 
the definition of size extensivity applies at any geometry, the concept of size 
consistency applies only in the limiting case of infinite separation. In addition, 
size consistency usually also implies correct dissociation into fragments; this 
is the source of much of the confusion arising from this term. Thus restricted 
Hartree-Fock (R.HF) is size extensive, but it, is riot necessarily size consistent, 
since it cannot properly describe dissociation into open-shell fragments. It can 
be shown that many-body perturbation theory (MBPT) and coupled-cluster 
(CC) methods are size extensive, but they will be size consistent only if they 
are based on refererice wavefunction which dissociates properly. 
.4s previously stated, truncated CI’s are neither size extensive nor size 
consistent. A simple (and often used) example makes this clear. Consider 
two noniriteracting hydrogen molecules. If the CISD method is used, then the 
energy of the two molecules at large separation will not be the same as the 
sum of their energies when calculated separately. For this to be the case, one 
would have t,o include quadruple excitations in the supermolecule calculation, 
since local double excitations could happen simultaneously on A and B. 
Clearly the fraction of the correlation energy recovered by a truncated CI 
will diminish as the size of the syst,em increases, making it a progressively less 
accurate method. There have been many attempts to correct the CI energy to 
make it size extensive. The most widely-used (and simplest) of these methods 
is referred to as the Davidson correction,”O~ll’ which is 
This correction approximately accounts for the effects of “unlinked quadru- 
ple” excitations (i.e. simultaneous pairs of double excitations), and there are 
marly similar expressions in use. For instance, the “renormalized” Davidsori 
correction’12 is 

--- PAGE 26 ---
168 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
Note that, when c: M 1, the two versions are nearly equivalent. A number of 
other variations exist,l13,114 some of which force the correction to vanish for 
two-electron systems. 
A multireference version of Davidson's correction is given by115 
AEMR-DC = (1 - i& (EMRCI - EMR), (54) 
where EMRCI is the multireference CI energy and EMR is the energy obtained 
from a CI in the space spanned by the references. We have simply replaced 
the CISD correlation energy in eq. (52) with the analogous multireference 
correlation energy, and we have replaced ci with the analogous sum of squares 
of all the reference coefficients. If the sum of the squares of reference coefficients 
is not near unity, better results may be obtained by using the renormalized 
version of this equation: 
It should be noted, however, that for a fixed system size, increasing the number 
of references decreases size extensivity errors. Indeed, for very highly corre- 
lated MR-CI wavefunctions, applying corrections such as (54) and (55) can 
sometimes lead to less reliable results. 
There are a number of other a posteriori size extensivity corrections, most 
of which are computationally trivial once the wavefunction has been obtained. 
Duch114 compares several of the more common corrections. Of course it is also 
possible to allow coupling between the wavefunction and the size extensivity 
correction. This leads to such methods as the coupled electron pair approxima- 
tion (CEPA),"' and the coupled pair functional (CPF) appro ache^.^'^ This is 
also the motivation behind the quadratic configuration interaction method of 
Pople, Head-Gordon, and Raghavachari."' These authors determine the cor- 
relation energy and CI coefficients for quadratic CI with singles and doubles 
(QCISD) by the following set of projection equations, in spin-orbital notation: 
(~OIfiId2~0) = ECOTT (56) 
= C: EcWT (57) 
(58) (@: 1 fi - Escj I (dl + 6'2 + C, C2) @o) 
(@$Ifi - Escjl(l + Ci + C2 + -(?;)(Do) 1 = cij ab EcoTT, 2 
where intermediate normalization ((@01@) = 1) has been employed, the Bril- 
louin condition has been assumed ((@pIHl@o) = 0), and d, and C2 are the 

--- PAGE 27 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 
standard single and double substitution operators, 169 
The QCISD projection equations differ from the equivalent CISD equations 
only in the addition of the quadratic terms ClC2 and fC;, which lead to size- 
extensive energies. Alternatively, the QCISD equations may be considered an 
approximation to CCSD in which certain terms have been neglected. Pople and 
co-workers show how to extend this approach to include triples fully (QCISDT) 
or perturbatively [QCISD(T)]."' 
'4 multireference method building approximate size extensivity into the 
wavefunction is the Averaged Coupled Pair Functional (ACPF) method of 
Gdanitz and Ahlri~hs,"~ which introduces an electron number dependence 
into the denominator of the MR-CISD energy functional. A similar method has 
been presented by Szalay and Bartlett under the name multireference averaged 
quadratic coupled-cluster (MR-AQCC)."'> Also noteworthy is the work of 
Malrieu and co-workers, who have presented a state-specific self-consistent 
dressing of the MR-CISD Hamiltonian matrix which gives size extensive re- 
sults, 122-124 
2.4.7 The Frozen Core Approximation 
It is quite common in correlated methods (including many-body perturbation 
theory, coupled-cluster, etc., as well as configuration interaction) to invoke the 
frozen core approximation, whereby the lowest-lying molecular orbitals, occu- 
pied by the inner-shell electrons, are constrained to remain doubly-occupied in 
all configurations. The frozen core for atoms lithium to neon typically consists 
of the 1s atomic orbital, while that for atoms sodium to argon consists of the 
atomic orbitals Is, 2s, 2p,, 2p, and 2p,. The frozen molecular orbitals are 
those made primarily from these inner-shell atomic orbitals. 
A justification for this approximation is that the inner-shell electrons of 
an atom are less sensitive to their environment than the valence electrons. 
Thus the error introduced by freezing the core orbitals is nearly constant for 
molecules containing the same types of atoms. In fact, it, is often preferable 
to employ the frozen core approximation as a general rule because most of 
the basis sets commonly used in ab initio quantum chemistry do not provide 
sufficient flexibility in the core region to accurately describe the correlation of 
the core electrons. Recently, Woon and Dunning have attempted to alleviate 
this problem by publishing correlation consistent core-valence basis sets. 125 

--- PAGE 28 ---
170 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
Not only does the frozen core approximation reduce the number of con- 
figurations, but it also reduces the computational effort required to evaluate 
matrix elements between the configurations which remain. Assuming that all 
frozen core orbitals are doubly occupied and orthogonal to all other molecular 
orbitals, it can be shown’26 that 
where $1 and GJ are identical to @I and @J, respectively, except that the core 
orbitals have been deleted from $1 and $J, and H has been replaced by fi0 
defined by 
where N is the number of electrons and N, is the number of core electrons. 
E, is the so-called “frozen-core energy,” which is the expectation value of the 
determinant formed from only the N, core electrons doubly occupying the 
TI, = N,/2 core orbitals 
Finally, ic(i) is the one-electron Hamiltonian operator for electron i in the 
average field produced by the N, core electrons, 
nc 
j=1 A&) = i(i) + c {24(i) - kj(i)}, 
with jj(i) and kj(i) representing the standard Coulomb and exchange opera- 
tors, respectively. Note that, although we have written the frozen core energy 
E, and frozen core operator kc in terms of molecular orbitals, it is not neces- 
sary to explicitly transform the one- and two-electron integrals involving core 
orbitals. Assuming real orbitals, we can define a frozen core density matrixlZ7 
in atomic (or symmetry adapted) orbitals as 
nc 
P;o = c c;c:, (65) 
i 
where Ci is the contribution of atomic orbital p to molecular orbital i. Now 
the frozen core operator in atomic orbitals becomes 

--- PAGE 29 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 171 
and the frozen core operator in molecular orbitals h:j can be obtained simply 
by transforming h;,,. Similarly the frozen core energy can be evaluated as 
P” 
= Tr(PCh) + Tr(P“h“). 
An analogous approximation is the deleted virtual approximation, whereby 
a few of the highest-lying virtual (unoccupied) molecular orbitals are con- 
strained to remain unoccupied in all configurations. Since these orbitals can 
never be occupied, they can be removed from the CI procedure entirely. The 
rationalization for this procedure is that it is unlikely that electrons will choose 
to partially populate high-energy orbitals in their attempt to avoid other elec- 
trons. However, this conclusion is generally true only for very high-lying virtual 
orbitals (such as those formed by antisymmetric combinations of core orbitals 
for a given atom). For all other virtual orbitals, such simplistic reasoning is 
insufficient. Indeed, Davidson points out that those high energy SCF virtual 
orbitals which result from the antisymmetric combination of the two basis 
functions describing each valence atomic orbital in a doub1e-C basis set (such 
as the 3p-like orbital formed from the minus combination of the larger and 
smaller 2p atomic orbitals on oxygen) often make the largest contribution to 
the correlation energy in Mdler-Plesset (MPn) wavefunctions.’*’ 
2.5 Choice of Orbitals 
The results of any configuration interaction procedure depend on the choice of 
the atomic orbital (AO) basis. However, for a fixed A0 basis, certain choices of 
molecular orbitals give equivalent CI wavefunctions. CI wavefunctions which 
are based on a single closed-shell reference and are truncated at a given excita- 
tion level are invariant to nonsingular linear transformations which mix doubly 
occupied orbitals with each other or unoccupied orbitals with each other. The 
invariance properties of CI wavefunctions based on open-shell references are 
more complicated, and the energy is generally not invariant to the rotation of 
open-shell orbitals unless certain extra references are added or the spin cou- 
plings are restricted to the first-order interacting space.lo7 A full CI is invariant 
to all nonsingular linear transformations among the orbitals, even those that 
mix occupied and unoccupied orbitals; hence, the choice of the “reference” is 
irrelevant for a full CI procedure. 
Some of the more elaborate CI spaces also exhibit invariance properties. 
Shavitt has defined the full class CI as one which partitions the orbitals into 
an arbitrary number of orthogonal subsets and includes all or none of the 

--- PAGE 30 ---
172 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer Ill 
N-electron functions which have a given partitioning of electrons among the 
subs pace^.^^ The RAS CI wavefunctions are of this type, as are the RAS for- 
mulations of SOCI and CISD[TQ]. Such CI wavefunctions are invariant to sep- 
arate, nonsingular linear transformations within any of the orbital subspaces. 
This property is relevant to the formulation of analytic gradients.'" 
For bond breaking processes, the restricted Hartree-Fock approximation 
will not yield a good reference. This can be remedied by employing a gener- 
alized valence bond (GVB) 130 reference or an unrestricted Hartree-Fock refer- 
ence. However, the latter entails spin contamination in the CI wavefunction by 
states of higher spin multiplicity. Another alternative is to use a multiconfig- 
urational (MC)53 or complete-active-space (CAS) SCF55,131 reference, which 
can be constructed to behave properly at all locations on the potential energy 
surface. 
For multireference CI's such as SOCI and CISD[TQ], or any RAS CI which 
uses the RAS I1 orbital subspace, it is important that the orbitals of the active 
space be good correlating orbitals (i.e., they should be localized in the same 
region of space as the occupied orbitals). This is equally important for selected 
CI procedures, in that the number of configurations needed to achieve a given 
accuracy will be reduced. This localization criterion is not generally satisfied by 
canonical SCF virtual orbitals, whose construction is not physically motivated 
because they are based on an N-electron potential rather than an (N - 1) 
electron potential. One possible solution is to determine the virtual orbitals 
using a different (and more suitable) effective Hamiltonian than that used for 
the occupied orbitals, and to orthogonalize the resulting orbitals against the 
occupied orbitals. This is the procedure in the improved virtual orbital (IVO) 
method of Hunt and G~ddard.'~~ IVO's look like excited state orbitals and 
are more contracted than canonical SCF orbitals. Nevertheless, they remain 
somewhat too diffuse for making the CI expansion as small as possible. A 
related and improved method is the modified virtual orbital (MVO) approach 
of Bau~chlicher,'~~ who obtains virtual orbitals by diagonalizing the virtual 
subspace of a Fock matrix construct,ed for the core electrons only (eq. 64). 
Another possibility for obtaining compact virtual orbitals is Davidson's K- 
orbital approach. 134 
More commonly, good correlating orbitals are obtained with the MCSCF53 
or CASSCF55 methods. Yet another possibility are the natural orbitals from 
a CISD wavefunction. Natural orbitals   NOS)^^^'^^ are defined as the eigen- 
functions of the one-particle density matrix; the eigenvalues are called the 
occupation numbers of the NOS. One drawback of NOS is t,hat the Hamilto- 
nian is no longer diagonally-dominant, 136 and this can decrease the efficiency 
of iterative diagonalization methods (section 3.2). 
Grev and Schaefer have shown for a number of small molecules t,hat the 

--- PAGE 31 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 173 
SOCI method performs just as well when based on CISD NOS as when based on 
CASSCF orbitals.16 Furthermore, they demonstrated that this is not merely 
due to the highly accurate treatment of correlation in the SOCI method, be- 
cause a SOCI wavefunction based on canonical SCF orbitals performs notably 
worse. One advantage of CISD natural orbitals is that they can be easier to 
compute than CASSCF orbitals. Another is that their importance to the CI 
wavefunction falls off very rapidly with occupation number. This means that 
one can delete several of the most weakly-occupied NOS from the MR-CISD 
procedure with little loss in the correlation energy recovered; such considera- 
tions do not necessarily hold for high-lying MCSCF or CASSCF orbitals. Ad- 
ditionally, Parisel and Ellinger have investigated the use of CI natural orbitals 
in variation-perturbation methods which employ a CI wavefunction as the 
zeroth-order solution in a subsequent second-order perturbation treatment ,137 
and Blomberg and Liu have considered the use of CI natural orbitals in SOCI 
transition moment cal~ulations.'~~ Balasubramanian uses SOCI natural or- 
bitals in his relativistic CI procedure.13g 
Finally, it has long been recognized that spatially localized orbitals should 
allow an efficient truncation of the CI space (see, for example, the PCILO 
method of Malrieu and co-worker~'~~~~~~). SCF orbitals can be localized ac- 
cording to the Boys pr~cedure'~' or various other methods. In most cases, 
the savings realized should outweigh any extra effort due to the loss of point- 
group symmetry. In the 1980s, Saebm and Pulay developed various localized 
correlation methods (including CISD) which can achieve computational sav- 
ings in two distinct ways: first, the pair correlation energy for distant pairs 
can be neglected (or estimated), and second, the set of virtual orbitals used as 
correlating orbitals can be restricted to the atomic orbitals in the vicinity of 
the orbital to be correlated (with components of occupied orbitals projected 
o~t).~~~3~~~ Since standard CISD scales as the sixth power of the system size, 
some type of localized correlation treatment is inevitable as quantum chemists 
seek to apply correlated methods to large molecules. 
2.6 Excited Electronic States 
Here we will briefly discuss configuration interaction descriptions of excited 
electronic states. As previously mentioned, excited states are described by 
higher-energy eigenvectors of the Hamiltonian. However, since one can apply 
spin and spatial symmetry restrictions to the N-electron basis functions, solv- 
ing for excited states which are energetically the lowest of a given symmetry 
species proceeds just as for the ground state. In this way, one can use orbitals 
which are optimal for each state. 
Much more challenging is the case when several states of the same symme- 

--- PAGE 32 ---
174 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
try species are required. Here, all but the lowest state are described by higher 
roots of the CI secular equations. Better zeroth-order descriptions are obtained 
if molecular orbitals are optimized separately for each state. However, this 
means that the resulting CI wavefunctions are interacting and nonorthogonal 
(complicating, for example, the evaluation of transition moments). The states 
can be made noninteracting and orthogonal by carrying out a non-orthogonal 
CI pr~cedure,~~~’~~~’~~ which requires the matrix S of overlaps between N- 
electron functions and a more complex procedure for evaluating matrix ele- 
ments of the Hamiltonian (the Slater-Condon rules no longer apply because 
they assume a single set of orthonormal orbitals). Using orbitals optimized 
separately for each excited state should allow one to use smaller CI expansions 
to achieve a given level of accura~y.~~~,*~~ 
However, optimizing excited state orbitals can be difficult becausc vari- 
ational optimization always finds the lowest solution of a given symmetry 
species; this problem is generally called “variational collapse”. 150 One solu- 
tion is to first obtain the SCF ground state solution, and then obtain the 
first excited state solution by requiring it to remain orthogonal to the ground 
state;15’ this process could in principle be repeated for higher-lying excited 
states. Another solution is to optimize the orbitals by following a higher root 
of the MCSCF secular equations. An early application of this idea was pre- 
sented by Bauschlicher and Yark~ny,’~ who optimized orbitals for the 2 ‘A1 
state of methylene by following the second root in a two-configuration SCF 
procedure. A correlated treatment of this state was obtained by solving for 
the second root of a two-reference CISD. This same procedure, in conjunction 
with more highly correlated CI methods, was recently used to re-examine the 
2 ‘A1 state of methylene.86 In 1987, Allen and Schaefer presented analytic 
gradients for this type of TCSCF-CI procedure and used them to study the 2 
‘A1 state of formaldehyde and ketene.i50~152 
Unfortunately, the MCSCF optimization generally worsens the description 
of the ground state while it improves the description of the excited state. Fre- 
quently it happens that the energetic ordering of the two states will become 
swapped, in a process called “root flipping,” and further optimization will 
yield orbitals describing the ground state.53 One way around these difficulties 
is to use a single set of orbitals for all the states of a given symmetry. The 
improved virtual orbitals (IVO) and modified virtual orbital (MVO) meth- 
ods described in the preceding section may be useful in this respect. A more 
typical approach is to modify the MCSCF method to yield a set of compro- 
mise orbitals; these can be obtained by the “state-averaged” procedure, which 
optimizes an averaged MCSCF energy obtained from averaged one- and two- 
electron reduced density matrices.54 A related possibility is to use averaged 
natural orbitals Finally, one might simply use ground state orbitals 

--- PAGE 33 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 175 
in conjunction with a CI method including a sufficiently complete treatment 
of electron correlation that the choice of orbitals becomes less important. 
The most commonly used CI procedure, CISD based on the ground state 
configuration and using SCF orbitals, yields excitation energies which are sub- 
stantially too large. One reason for this is that the ground state is correlated 
by all singles and double substitutions, whereas singly excited states are corre- 
lated only by singles and those doubles that involve replacement of the singly 
excited electron. Hence, the correlation treatment is imbalanced in favor of 
the ground state. This has been considered in more detail by Head-Gordon 
and Lee, who have analyzed the performance of CISD for excited states in the 
context of perturbation theory for electronic excitation energies; they find that 
CISD is not even correct through second order.'54 Another problem is that, 
the SCF orbitals themselves bias results towards the ground state. 
Alternatively, one might specifically design modified CI methods for ex- 
cited states; the symmetry-adapted cluster (SAC) CI approach of Nakat,suji 
is such a method,32.'55~156 although it also contains elements from coupled- 
cluster theory.6 Another alternative is the CASPTB method of Andersson, 
Malmqvist, ROOS, and co-~orkers,'"~-~~~ which is a second-order perturbation 
theory based on a CASSCF reference function. Rather than employ more 
complex CI approaches, Pople, Head-Gordon, and others have advocated the 
use of configuration interaction with only singles (CIS) as a qualitative ex- 
cited state theory and as a starting point for more advanced  treatment^.'"^, ''' 
Clearly CIS offers no improvement for the ground state (Brillouin's theorem), 
but higher roots represent excited states with an accuracy in the excitation 
energies of around 1 eV (23 kcal mol-'). CIS has the unusual property of be- 
ing both size extensive and variational; no other truncated CI method is size 
extensive. Its low computational cost and size extensivity make CIS applicable 
to large systems. Head-Gordon and co-workers have introduced a perturbative 
doubles correction for CIS which they denote CIS(D);"' this method tends to 
improve excitation energies, but it, does not necessarily improve geometries or 
other 
The performance of simple CIS for open-shell systems such as radicals is 
not as good as for closed-shell systems, regardless of whether an unrestricted 
Hartree-Fock (UHF) or restricted open-shell Hartree-Fock (ROHF) reference 
is used.'63 Maurice and Head-Gordon find improved results for these systems 
by using a spin-pure CI wavefunction, denoted XCIS, which adds to the sin- 
gles those doubly substituted determinants in which the excited electron has 
its spin flipped and one of the open-shell electrons is also spin flipped to con- 
serve Sz.164 It is interesting to note that these limited double substitutions are 
actually single substitutions from the point of view of spatial orbital config- 
urations; this problem of the non-transferability of the substitution level (or 

--- PAGE 34 ---
176 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
LLexcitation level”) definition between determinants and CSFs has occasionally 
been mentioned in the literat~re.~~~‘~~ Size extensivity is maintained in the 
XCIS method by uncoupling the SCF solution from the excited states. More 
flexible approaches which still scale favorably with system size would provide a 
useful alternative to the more expensive EOM-CCSD6 and CASPT215’ meth- 
ods and are eagerly anticipated. 
3 Common Features of Implementations 
This section briefly discusses two elements common to all configuration inter- 
action programs: transformation of integrals, and iterative subspace diagonal- 
ization of the Hamiltonian. 
3.1 Integral Transformation 
As discussed in section 2.3, the Hamiltonian matrix elements are generally writ- 
ten in terms of one- and two-electron integrals in the molecular orbital (MO) 
basis. However, these integrals are originally calculated in the atomic orbital 
(AO) basis, or perhaps the symmetry-adapted orbital (SO) basis. Therefore it 
is necessary to transform the A0 or SO integrals into the MO basis, according 
to 
hij = CCLCihE,,, (68) 
(ijlkl) = c c;c;c;C:(pv~p), (69) P 
I1”P 
where Ci is the coefficient for the contribution of atomic orbital p to molecular 
orbital i, and real orbitals have been assumed. Although the coefficients Ci 
are generally the SCF coefficients, they might instead be the coefficients of the 
CI natural orbitals in the atomic orbital basis, etc. 
3.1.1 One-electron Integrals 
The transformation of the one-electron integrals is computationally inexpen- 
sive and easily accomplished: without point group symmetry, this transforma- 
tion can be performed as two half-transformations, each of which requires a 
multiplication of the one-electron integral matrix by the SCF coefficient ma- 
trix, for a total of 2n3 multiplications. Spatial symmetry reduces this cost 
because the one-electron integral and SCF coefficient matrices are block di- 
agonal according to irreducible representation (irrep), and the transformation 
can be carried out an irrep at a time (cf. Figure 1). Note that it would also be 

--- PAGE 35 ---
177 Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 
Figure 1: Transformation of one-electron integrals. 
Loop over irreps r 
hrj = C, CFjhru (matrix mult) 
hg = C, CLih$ (matrix mult) 
end loop over J? 
possible to utilize the permutational symmetry hij = hji, but this would typi- 
cally reduce efficiency because the transformation could no longer be written 
in terms of matrix multiplications, which are very fast on vector supercomput- 
ers (e.g., CRAY C90) or pipelined workstations (e.g., IBM RS/6000).166 Note 
that if orbitals are frozen in the correlated procedure (cf. section 2.4.7), h,, is 
replaced by the frozen core operator hZu (eq. 66). 
3.1.2 Two-electron Integrals 
Transforming the two-electron integrals is considerably more time-consuming. 
Equation (69) implies that this transformation is an n4 process for each of 
n4 integrals (ijlkl) (or n8 overall), but of course it can be carried out as four 
separate quarter-transformations analogous to the two half-transformations re- 
quired for the one-electron integrals; this strategy requires 4n5 multiplications 
if symmetry is neglected and it constitutes a fairly demanding computational 
procedure if n is larger than 100 or so. Fortunately, the full transformation is 
not necessary for the simple CIS method because only MO integrals with two 
internal and two external indices are relevant. Matrix elements for most other 
CI wavefunctions are expressed in terms of the full set of MO integrals, but 
by performing some compensating work, one can avoid the full transformation 
for CISD,'67,168 internally-contracted MR-CISD,'0'x'68 and even uncontracted 
MR-CISD.lG9 For the latter, however, Saunders and van Lenthe argue that 
the extra steps required to avoid the full transformation may cost more than 
the transformation itself unless the A0 integral list exhibits considerable spar- 
sity.lZ7 In the general case, the full set of integrals is required. Therefore, 
various methods for employing spatial and permutational symmetry have been 
proposed to reduce the operation count. In this context, the "permutational 
symmetry" refers to the eight-fold redundancy in the two-electron integrals for 
real orbitals. 
Wilson170 provides a very clear and helpful survey of four-index transforma- 
tion methods published before 1987. More recent work has focused attention 
on the sparsity of quantities in the A0 basis. For example, Hber, Almlof, and 
Feyereisen have presented an integral-direct transformation algorithm which 

--- PAGE 36 ---
178 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
Figure 2: Pre-sorting the two-electron A0 integrals in TRANSQT. 
Form frozen'core density matrix, eq. (65) 
Initialize Yoshimine structure for sorting A0 two-el ints 
Read two-el ints from disk; form frozen core operator, eq. (66) 
Complete Yoshimine sort, ensuring p 2 q, T 1 s, but not pq 2 TS 
Free Yoshimine pre-sort structure 
Evaluate frozen core energy, eq. (67) and write integrals to Yoshimine buffers 
employs integral pre-screening techniques and can even exploit non-abelian 
point-group symmetry.171 However, our attention here is focused on integral 
transformation routines for highly correlated CI wavefunctions, which typi- 
cally means that one can consider only small molecules for which there is less 
benefit in exploiting sparsity in the A0 basis. Of the conventional approaches 
discussed by Wilson, one of the most promising is the Saunders-van Lenthe al- 
g~rithm,'~~ which has an operation count of N 25n5/24 (the operation count is 
somewhat less if the number of transformed orbitals is less than the number of 
AO's). Saunders and van Lenthe present an explicit algorithm for the case of 
no spatial symmetry.'27 However, in our experience it is not entirely straight- 
forward to symmetry adapt their algorithm and simultaneously maintain a 
high degree of vectorization. On the other hand, we find it straightforward 
to symmetry adapt a simpler series of quarter transformations in which some 
of the permutational symmetry of the integrals is ignored. This simpler code 
remains efficient because it calls optimized matrix multiplication subroutines. 
This new program, TRANSQT, developed by Daniel Crawford, Justin Fermann, 
and the present authors, runs faster than previous transformation programs 
produced by this group which take more advantage of permutational symme- 
tries. 
The algorithm consists of three major parts: a pre-sort of the two-electron 
SO integrals, the first half-transform, and the second half-transform (Figures 
2-4). To keep track of spatial symmetry, the loops over orbitals are broken up 
into loops over irreps of the point group and over orbitals within those irreps. 
The atomic orbitals are numbered consecutively within each irrep, which al- 
lows the use of relative indices (denoted by capital letters in the figures) for 
numbering orbitals with a fixed irrep. Molecular orbitals are also numbered 
this way until they are written out at the end of the transformation, when they 
are renumbered according to whatever order is used by subsequent programs. 
As seen in the figures, all multiplications which give zero by symmetry are 

--- PAGE 37 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 179 
avoided. The use of matrix multiplications means that the algorithm takes 
only partial advantage of permutational symmetry. The pre-sorted integrals 
P use the permutational symmetries (pqlrs) = (qplrs) = (pqlsr) = (qplsr), 
but they do not allow the swapping of the first pair of indices with the last 
pair [e.g., (pqlrs) = (rslpq)]. These same permutational symmetries are em- 
ployed during multiplication except that if rsym = ssym, then the symmetry 
(pqlrs) = (pqlsr) is not utilized. Similar considerations apply to the second 
half-transform: the half-transformed integrals J are stored similarly to P, with 
The TRANSQT algorithm employs canonical indices57 for pairs of orbitals, 
such as pq =ioff [PI + q. These indices are useful for computing the address 
of an element in a symmetric matrix which is stored by writing only the lower 
triangle to a linear array. The array ioffb] contains the address of the first 
element in row p, and it is assumed that p 2 q. If orbital numbering starts from 
zero, then ioff [O] = 0 and ioff [p] = p + ioff [pl]. The memory requirements 
are for two matrices (A and B) with dimension equal to the number of atomic 
orbitals, a matrix of SCF coefficients for each irrep, two blocks which hold all 
two-electron integrals (pqlrs) with a fixed pair of first indices pq, and various 
buffers associated with Yoshimine sorting. This sorting method, first described 
by Y~shimine'~~ in 1969, is needed to sort the integrals so that they can be 
read sequentially in the required order. The pre-sort is necessary because the 
first half-transform requires all (pqlrs) for a given pq, but the integrals are not 
stored this way in the disk file produced by our integrals program, where they 
posses the full eight-fold permutational symmetry. For instance, the first half- 
transform will require integrals such as (11143), but this integral is only stored 
as (43111) on disk. The pre-sort adds the redundant integrals (kllzj) = (ijlkl) 
and places them all in the correct order for reading. The second Yoshimine 
sort involves the half-transformed integrals: these integrals are formed in the 
order (pqlkl), where pq is fixed. In the second half-transform, however, the 
program needs to read all (kllpq) for a fixed Id.* Since the integrals were not 
written in this order, they must be sorted so they can be read this way. (Pnlw = (PW) = (qPlk0 = (qpllk). 
3.2 Iterative Techniques for Solving Hc = Ec 
Standard numerical methods exist for diagonalizing real symmetric matrices 
such as the Hamiltonian H.t However, such methods usually require the stor- 
'The convention used here is to write the fixed orbital pair first in the two-electron 
integral. However, one must exercise caution because the half-transformed integrals do not 
possess the symmetry (pqllcl) = (kllpp) since a distinction must be drawn between the A0 
and MO pairs. 
'Once again, real orbitals have been assumed, along with a nonrelativistic Hamiltonian. 

--- PAGE 38 ---
180 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
Figure 3: First half-transform in TRANSQT. 
Initialize tmp matrices A and B and buffers Pblock and Jblock 
Loop psym over irreps 
Loop p over orbitals in irrep psym 
Loop qsym over irreps w/ qsym 5 psglm 
Loop q over orbitals in irrep qsym w/ q 5 p 
Pg = ioffbI+ Q 
Read &Ira) for all rs given pq into Pblock 
Loop rsym over irreps 
Compute ssym from psym, qsym, rsym 
Loop r over orbitals in irrep rsym (relative idx R) 
Loop s over orbs in ssym w/ s 5 r (re1 idx S) 
rs = ioff[r] + s 
A[R][S] = Pblock[rs] 
if rsym = ssym,A[S][R] = Pblock[rs] 
end loop over s 
end loop over r 
matrix multiply: 
loop re1 idx R over orbs in rsym 
loop re1 idx L over active orbs in ssym 
loop re1 idx S over orbs in ssym 
B[R][L] = B[R][L] + A[R][S] * Ca8~"[S][L] 
end loops over S, L, R 
matrix multiply: 
loop re1 idx K over active orbs in rsym 
loop re1 idx L over active orbs in ssym 
loop re1 idx R over orbs in rsym 
A[K][L] = A[K][L] + (Crau")T[K][R] * B[R][L] 
end loops over R, L, K 
loop k over active orbitals in rsym (re1 idx K) 
loop 1 over active orbs in ssym (re1 idx L), 1 5 k 
kl = ioff[k] + 1 
Jblock[kl] = A[K][L] 
end loops over 1, k 
Write Jblock to Yoshimine buffers 
end loop over rsym 
end loop over q 
end loop over qsym 
end loop over p 
end loop over psym 
flush, close 110 files 
free Pblock 
Yoshimine sort half-transformed integrals J, free Yoshimine struct 

--- PAGE 39 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 
Figure 4: Second half-transform in TRANSQT. 
Loop ksym over irreps 
Loop k over active orbitals in irrep ksym 
Loop lsym over irreps w/ lsym 5 ksym 
Loop 1 over active orbitals in irrep lsym w/ 1 5 k 
kl = ioff[k] + 1 
zero Jblock 
Read all (kllpq) for given kl into Jblock 
Loop psym over irreps 
Compute qsym from ksym, lsym, and psym 
if (qsym > psym) next psym 
Loop qsym over irreps, with qsym 5 psym 
Loop p over orbs in psym (re1 idx P) 
Loop q over orbs in qsym (re1 idx Q) 
pq = ioffbl+ q if P 2 q, else ioff[ql+ P 
A[pI[Ql= JblocN~~qI 
end loop over q 
matrix multiply: 
Loop re1 idx P over orbs in psym end loop over p 
Loop re1 idx J over active orbs in qsym 
Loop re1 idx Q over orbs in qsym 
JWI[Jl = W"[Jl+ A[PI[QI * Cq""TQ1[Jl 
End loops over &, J, P 
matrix multiply: 
Loop re1 idx I over active orbs in psym 
Loop re1 idx J over active orbs in qsym 
Loop re1 idx P over orbs in psym 
A[Il[J] = A[I][J] + (CJ's~m)T[l][P] * B[P][J] 
end loops over P, J, I 
Write matrix A to buffer 
End loop over qsym 
End loop over psym 
End loop over 1 
End loop over lsym 
End loop over k 
End loop over ksym 
free Jblock 
flush and close 1/0 buffers 181 

--- PAGE 40 ---
182 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
age of H in core memory (if eigenvectors are also computed, then one actually 
needs memory to store two matrices of this size). If the CI includes a mere 
10,000 determinants (certainly a small CI space), storing the full matrix H 
would require 800 megabytes. As of 1997, this represents a large amount of 
core memory (although disk storage would not be a problem). It is little 
consolation that the symmetry of H could be used to cut this requirement ap- 
proximately in half. Another very important difficulty is the time required to 
diagonalize matrices this size or larger. Most diagonalization routines scale as 
O(n3), which is certainly problematic for n 2 lo4. Only for smaller matrices 
do the standard methods become practical. 
In typical applications, only the ground electronic state or perhaps a few of 
the low lying excited states are of interest. Hence methods which obtain only 
the lowest few roots of the CI matrix are greatly preferred over methods which 
compute the entire spectrum. Furthermore, storage requirements are greatly 
reduced if H is not stored at all; direct CI methods, discussed in section 4, 
form products Hc = r~ directly from the MO integrals. 
Most techniques for solving large eigenvalue problems fall under the cate- 
gory of subspace iteration methods, which iteratively solve the eigenvalue prob- 
lem in a linear vector subspace spanned by only a few vectors. Malmq~ist'~~ 
provides a concise review of the subspace iteration methods most commonly 
found in quantum chemistry. Here we will outline some of these methods and 
note recent advances. 
3.2.1 Davidson's Method 
Davidson's method for the iterative solution of the lowest few eigenvalues 
and eigenvectors of large real, symmetric matrices'O' is undoubtedly the most 
widely used technique for solving the CI secular equations. In this method, 
one applies standard diagonalization methods to a small Hamiltonian matrix 
formed in a subspace {bi} of L orthonormal expansion vectors, where L in- 
creases from iteration to iteration but is typically very much smaller than the 
dimension of H (the subspace generally includes less than a dozen vectors per 
root). At each iteration, the Davidson algorithm estimates a correction vector 
for each root currently under consideration and adds it to the set {bi} after 
Schmidt orthogonalization. 
Davidson used perturbation theory to arguelo' that the best correction 
vector 6 to the current iteration's guess vector c satisfies 
(H - XI)6 = -(H - XI)C. (70) 
In the Davidson method, one approximates X by the current iteration's eigen- 
value, and H is assumed to be diagonally dominant so that 6 can be approxi- 

--- PAGE 41 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 
mated by 
where Hd is the diagonal of H and the denominator is referred to as the 
precondztzoner. 
Liu showed how to extend Davidson's method to solve for several roots si- 
m~ltaneously,'~~ leading to what is called the Simultaneous Expansion Method, 
the Davidson-Liu method, or the block Davidson method. The detailed Davidson 
Liu algorithm, adapted from ref. 174, is presented in Figure 5. 
At each iteration, the current approximations to the eigenvalues of H are 
given by the eigenvalues of the small matrix G, which is the Hamiltonian in 
the subspace spanned by the expansion vectors {b$}, with matrix elements 
G,, = (b,, Hb,). Likewise, the current approximate eigenvectors are linear 
combinations of the subspace vectors with coefficients given by the eigenvectors 
(Y of G: 183 
b = -(Hd - AI)-'(H - ~I)c, (71) 
L 
ck = Cay,kb,. (76) a=1 
The convergence of the k-th root can be checked by the sum of squares of the 
last m components of ak in step 2 or by the norm of the residue vector r in 
step 3. 
Unless very tight convergence criteria are specified, it is possible for the 
Davidson-Liu method to converge on the wrong eigenvector if the initial guess 
vectors are poor. Although this will not happen for the ground state unless 
a completely inappropriate guess is provided, it occasionally happens when 
several roots are sought. Davidson and co-workers recommend initial loose 
convergence of more roots than are actually needed, and then tighter conver- 
gence on the desired roots.175 Possible choices for the initial vectors include 
unit vectors (chosen according to the diagonal elements of H with the largest 
magnitudes) or eigenvectors of some small block of H. 
Equations (73) and (75) show that after a matrix-vector product a, = Hc, 
is computed it is needed again in subsequent iterations. Since the construction 
of the vectors {a,} is the most time consuming step in the iterative diagonaliza- 
tion of H, they are stored on disk along with the expansion vectors {b,}. The 
original Davidson method converges one root at a time and requires storage 
for two (segments of) vectors at once in core memory. If more core memory is 
available, then the Davidson-Liu method can reduce computational and 1/0 
requirements. For example, one pass through the subspace expansion vectors 
is sufficient to construct several correction vectors b simultaneously. Likewise, 
a single construction of the matrix elements of H, several a vectors can be 
formed simultaneously. 
Note that the preconditioner in eq. (74) requires the diagonal elements of 

--- PAGE 42 ---
184 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
Figure 5: The Davidson-Liu Iterative Method for the Lowest Few Eigenvectors 
and Eigenvalues of Real, Symmetric Matrices (Ref. 174) 
1. Select a set of L orthonormal guess vectors, at least one for each root 
desired, and place in the set {bi}. 
2. Use a standard diagonalization method to solve the L x L eigenvalue 
problem 
where Gak = Akak, k = 1,2,. . . , M 
Gij = (bi, Hbj) = (bi, ~j), 1 5 i,j 5 L (72) 
(73) 
and M is the number of roots of interest. 
3. Form the correction vectors {Sk}, k = 1,2,. . . , M, defined as 
Sf = (Xk - HI,)-%;, I = 1,2,. . . , N 
where /., 
rk = c$(H - Ak)bi (74) 
(75) 
i=l 
and N is the number of determinants or CSFs. 
4. Normalize {dk}. 
5. Schmidt orthonormalize S' against the set {bi} and append the result to 
{bi}. Repeat this process for each of the other M - 1 correction vectors, 
neglecting those whose Schmidt orthonormalized norm is less than some 
threshold T - lop3. This results in the addition of m new b vectors, 
with 1 <_ m 5 M. 
6. Increase L by m and return to step 2. 

--- PAGE 43 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 185 
the Hamiltonian. These can be precomputed and stored on disk, or they can 
be computed on-the-fly. Alternatively, they can be approximated in some cases 
using orbital energies. In a determinantal basis, Davidson's preconditioner can 
actually cause the CI vector to break spin symmetry. Indeed, Knowles and 
Handy noted this difficulty in their pioneering 1984 paper on determinant based 
configuration interacti~n.'~~ They found that this problem can be avoided if 
the diagonal elements of the Hamiltonian HII are replaced by an average HII 
over all determinants which have the same spatial orbital configuration as 
determinant I but differ in the distribution of spins. 
If several roots are sought, or convergence takes many iterations, then the 
number of vectors stored on disk can become large, leading to 1/0 delays 
during the construction of G or r. Furthermore, disk storage can become a 
problem if the vectors themselves are very large. One solution is to apply com- 
pression algorithms to the subspace vectors and D ve~tors.~~~*'~~ Additionally, 
the Davidson-Liu method can be restarted with only M expansion vectors 
by using the current approximation to each eigenvector, eq. (76), as the new 
starting guess vectors. Clearly this procedure hinders the rate of convergence 
because information is lost after the vector subspace is collapsed: subsequent 
diagonalizations have less variational freedom because of the reduced dimen- 
sion of the subspace. However, in 1990 van Lenthe and Pulay presented the 
remarkable concl~sion'~~ that when only a single root is sought, collapsing the 
subspace does not substantially degrade the rate of convergence if the subspace 
is collapsed down to two vectors instead of just one. This procedure, which 
may be justified by the theory of conjugate gradients, was later generalized 
to multiple roots by Murray, Racine, and Da~ids0n.l~~ The collapsed vector 
subspace contains the current guess vector for each root, as before, and also 
the guess vectors from the previous iteration (after they have been Schmidt 
orthogonalized against the other vectors in the collapsed subspace). 
Other work has focused on improving the correction vector. As noted by 
Ol~en,'~ Si~ad,l~~ Sleijpen and van der Vorst,lEO and others,ls1>ls2 Dav idson's 
equation (70) seems to imply that the optimal update vector 6 is just the 
negative of the current guess CI vector c. Clearly, this would not allow for 
the expansion of the vector subspace. Sleijpen et al.180 have pointed out that 
Davidson assumed that 6 is orthogonal to c in deriving eq. (70). However, 
Davidson's method only enforces this orthogonality after 6 has already been 
determined. Hence, a more effective preconditioner may result from explicitly 
enforcing this orthogonality while 6 is being constructed, and several authors 
have recently proposed such prec~nditioners.~~~ 181~182 
Another improvement suggested by these authors and others54g561173 is to 
lift the assumption of strict diagonal dominance of the Hamiltonian in the pre- 
conditioner. One selects a subspace of the most important N-electron functions 

--- PAGE 44 ---
186 C. D. Sherrill and H. E Schaefer 111 
in the CI space and, for the purposes of the preconditioner, approximates the 
Hamiltonian as 
where primes denote the small selected subspace and double primes denote 
the complement subspace. Although relatively few (up to several hundred) 
determinants might be included in the selected space, it is important to take 
complete sets of determinants which are capable of forming spin eigenfunctions 
so that the spin symmetry of the CI vector can be maintained during the 
iterative procedure. Note that the Hamiltonian is assumed diagonal in the 
complement subspace and coupling is ignored. This leads to two equations for 
the correction vector: 
The second equation of course becomes 
and is analogous to eq. (74). The first equation can be written in terms of the 
eigenvalues p’ and eigenvectors u’ of the small matrix H’: 
3.2.2 Olsen’s Method 
Realizing the difficulties of storing several b and cr vectors for very large CI 
spaces, Olsen proposed that each correction vector be added directly to the 
current CI vector, and that the resulting (renormalized) vector be used as 
the next iteration’s guess vector. Of course for this scheme to work well, the 
correction vector must be as good as possible. Olsen therefore introduced an 
improved method for generating the correction vector, using some of the ideas 
just discussed above. If the current (normalized) CI vector is denoted c, then 
its energy is 
The Hamiltonian is then divided into two terms, E = (c,Hc). (82) 
(83) H = H(O) + 

--- PAGE 45 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 
and the CI eigenvalue equation can be written 187 
(H(O) + H('))(c + 6~) = (E + ~E)(c + bc), (84) 
where bc and 6E are the corrections to the current CI vector and energy. If 
6c is required to be orthogonal to c then (neglecting quadratic terms) 
6c = -(H(') - E)-' [(H - E)c - cSE], (85) 
(86) where 
(c, (H(O) - E)-'(H - E)c) 6E = (c, (H(') - E)-'c) 
The correction vector 6c is superior to that used in the standard Davidson 
method since it remains rigorously orthogonal to c and therefore retains the 
ability to introduce new character into the CI vector even near convergen~e.~~ 
This correction vector was also derived by Bofill and Anglada from other con- 
siderations.ls' In 1990, Olsen, Jorgensen, and Simons used this method to 
perform three iterations of the first one-billion determinant CI calc~lation.~~ 
The zeroth-order part of the Hamiltonian H(') was defined as a 400 x 400 block 
of determinants formed from the lowest diagonal elements of H, and as the 
diagonal of H outside this block. This procedure requires the storage of four 
vectors on disk (three if the diagonal elements of H are computed as needed). 
Although the Olsen method can be very helpful when disk space is lim- 
ited, its convergence characteristics are not always very good. Indeed, as first 
pointed out by Mitrushenkov,la3 the Olsen method does not guarantee that 
the energy decreases every iteration. However, it is of course possible to use 
Olsen's preconditioner in conjunction with iterative methods which keep more 
than one CI vector and c vector. Mitrushenkovls3 advocates diagonalizing the 
Hamiltonian in the space of the current and previous CI vectors: 
H,, = (c(Q, &)) (87) 
H,,%-l = H,-l,% = (&), c(*-1)). (88) 
Explicitly, the nonorthogonal pseudo-eigenvalue equation is 
where s is the overlap between the current and previous CI vectors, (~(21, c(~-')). 
At each iteration, the current CI vector is recomputed as di) = ai-ldi-') + 
aidi), and di) = ai-ldz-l) + aidi). Hii is set to Ei in eq. (89)' and then 
the new vector c(~+') is computed using Olsen's method. This process is re- 
peated until convergence is reached. In our experience Mitrushenkov's method 

--- PAGE 46 ---
188 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
improves convergence substantially in the first few iterations compared to 
the single-vector version of Olsen’s method. Unfortunately, as CI vector ap- 
proaches convergence, eq. (89) becomes ill-conditioned because Hi-1,i approaches 
Hii and s approaches unity. This difficulty can be avoided by reverting to the 
single-vector Olsen method near convergence. 
4 Determinant-Based Algorithms for Highly 
Correlated CI 
This section describes several determinant-based CI algorithms. The alpha 
and beta string formalism of Handy44 is introduced, and the equations for 
u = Hc within this formalism are derived for the full CI and RAS CI cases.46 
Practical considerations for implementation are also discussed. 
4.1 Slater Determinants, CSFs, and Direct CI 
Slater determinants are eigenfunctions of Sz; therefore, the CI space includes 
only those determinants with a given value of M, unless a spin-dependent 
Hamiltonian is used.ls4 However, Slater determinants are not eigenfunctions 
of S2 as are configuration state functions (CSFs), and dimension of the CI space 
in Slater determinants is typically about 2-4 times larger than in CSFs (for 
more about CSFs, see the books by Paunc~l~~v~~~). Thus it would seem that 
CSFs are preferable to Slater determinants for use as CI expansion functions. 
However, determinants offer certain advantages in the context of “direct CI” 
methods that can outweigh the disadvantage of a larger CI space. 
In computational quantum chemistry the term “direct” has come to mean 
that certain quantities, which are too large to hold in core memory, are com- 
puted on-the-fly instead of being stored on disk and read as needed. A direct 
SCF implies that the two-electron integrals are computed on-the-fly. For a 
direct the integrals are still held on disk, but the Hamiltonian matrix it- 
self is not explicitly constructed or stored. Instead, the vector u = Hc, which 
is required in iterative subspace methods for diagonalizing the Hamiltonian 
(cf. section 3.2), is computed directly from the one- and two-electron integrals 
and the CI vector; the construction of u is the time-consuming step in the di- 
rect CI method. The coefficients for multiplying the CI vector by the integrals 
have already been introduced (cf. section 2.3.2) as the one- and two-electron 
coupling coefficients; these may be written to disk in a file traditionally called 
the “formula tape.’’ Unfortunately, this procedure is still unsuitable for a di- 
rect CI, since the coupling coefficients will require as much storage space as 
the Hamiltonian matrix itself, leading to long 1/0 delays. Hence, in a direct 

--- PAGE 47 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 189 
CI, the coupling coefficients should be calculated as needed (or they should 
be built into the program). A next step would be to eliminate storage of the 
CI vector itself; efforts along these lines have been described as superdirect 
CI. 18’9 188 Alternatively, Carter and co-workers have considered pseudospec- 
tral approaches which eliminate the need to construct two-electron integrals 
as separate  intermediate^.^^^-^" 
The direct CI method was first introduced in 1972 by Roos for the case 
of CISD from a closed-shell reference function. lg3 However, generalization 
to more complex CI spaces, such as MR-CISD, proved exceedingly difficult 
due to the large number of special cases. The next breakthrough did not 
occur until Sha~itt~l?~~ cast the work of Paldus on the unitary group ap- 
proach (UGA)40*78 into a graphical formalism which represents CSFs in the 
Gelfand-Tsetlin canonical basis as walks on a directed graph. Not only did 
this graphical representation make the UGA more accessible to chemists, but 
it also provided a convenient formalism for carrying out computations. Any 
pair of walks (CSFs) forms a loop, and matrix elements are evaluated based on 
the shapes of these loops, with only certain loop types giving nonzero matrix 
 element^.^'^^^ For example, one-electron coupling coefficients are expressed as 
where Tk identifies the shape of the loop formed by walks I and J at level k 
on the Shavitt graph, and bk is the “b-value” of the vertex on walk J at level 
k (see ref. 42 for more details). The coupling coefficient vanishes unless walks 
I and J coincide everywhere below level i - 1 and above level j on the graph 
(assuming i < j). This graphical unitary group approach (GUGA) was devel- 
oped with a philosophy similar to that of the direct CI. The idea was to use 
each coupling coefficient, specified by a loop on the Shavitt graph, for a whole 
series of Hamiltonian matrix elements differing in their common upper and 
lower walks. The first multireference CI method based on the ideas of Paldus 
and Shavitt was developed by Brooks and S~haefer.~~ Particularly notable was 
their computation on the lBlu state of ethylene involving all single and double 
excitations relative to three open-shell singlet reference  configuration^.^^ How- 
ever, a detailed analysis of the “loop-driven” GUGA CI program of Brooks and 
Schaefer indicates that, in practice, few loops contribute to very many matrix 
elements, and it remains more efficient to write the coupling coefficients to the 
formula tape rather than to recompute them as needed. 
Nevertheless, the graphical approach afforded new insight into the structure 
of the Hamiltonian. In particular, for CI spaces which allow only one or two 
electrons in the external space, the graphical representation of the external 
space becomes very regular, and the external portion of a loop can only have 

--- PAGE 48 ---
190 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
a few possible shapes.lg4 Siegbahn made the crucial observation that the one- 
and two-electron coupling coefficients can be factored into contributions from 
the internal orbitals and from the external orbitals, 
(91) 
(92) IJ = int IJ ext IJ 
'Yi j 'Yij X 'Yij 
r;hl = intr&$ x eztrz!jJkl, 
and that the calculation can be "direct" in the external space when the external 
factors are very simple. 
In 1979, Siegbahn showedlg5 that for the case of single replacements from 
a reference wavefunction which is a full CI in the active space (Le., first-order 
CI13), the external factors for the coupling coefficients are all simply +l; hence, 
only the internal space coupling coefficients must be precomputed and stored 
on the formula tape. This results in a substantial savings because the number 
of internal coupling coefficients will be much smaller than the total number of 
coupling coefficients. In 1980, Siegbahn extended these ideas to the general 
case of all single and double substitutions for an arbitrary set of references 
(i.e., MR-C1SD).lg4 Once again, the external coupling coefficient factors are 
simple (fl, ffi, and 2) and can be dealt with in a direct fashion. The shape- 
driven GUGA program of Saxe, Fox, Schaefer, and Handyg1 is based in part 
on Siegbahn's approach, as is the program of Saunders and van Lenthe127 and 
the COLUMBUS program of Shavitt, Lischka, Shepard, and ~o-workers.~~~~~~ 
Unfortunately, these simplifications are not directly applicableg1 when more 
than two electrons are allowed into the external space (e.g., CISDT, CIS- 
DTQ, and full CI). Furthermore, even for MR-CISD wavefunctions, large ac- 
tive spaces can lead to a large number of internal coupling coefficients, which 
can become difficult to deal with.lg7 The next advance was once again due 
to Siegbahn, who suggested a factorization of the two-electron coupling coef- 
ficients by inserting the resolution of the identity: 
Although the resolution of the identity requires an infinite sum in principle, in 
this case only a finite number of states I@K) are relevant. For fixed i,j, k, I, I, 
and J, the product term will vanish unless I@K) is obtained from I@J) by 
a single substitution from orbital 1 to orbital k and from I@I) by a single 
substitution from orbital i to orbital j. For configuration state functions, this 
completely specifies the orbital configuration of ~QK), and only a few spin 
couplings must be summed over. This approach led Knowles and Handylog 
to present a vectorized full CI algorithm based on Slater determinants rather 
than CSFs. For Slater determinants, the one-electron coupling coefficients 

--- PAGE 49 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 191 
appearing in (93) and elsewhere are very easy to calculate on-the-fly, allowing a 
fully direct CI procedure. For Slater determinants 11) and IJ), ?AJ = (Il&lJ) 
is 0 unless determinant IJ) becomes determinant 11) (within a sign) when an 
alpha or beta electron is moved from orbital j to orbital i, in which case yy 
becomes fl. For the special case i = j,1 = J, yil counts the number of 
electrons in orbital i for determinant I, yielding 0, 1, or 2. 
Because of this simplicity and the ability to carry out computations in a 
fully direct fashion, many of the full and restricted CI algorithms developed 
over the last ten years have employed Slater determinants, and in this section 
we will focus our attention on these determinant-based methods. However, we 
should note that further progress has also been made in CSF-based approaches. 
Much of the recent work in direct CI methods has been based on the symmetric 
group approach (SGA)'99-203 rather than the related unitary group approach 
(UGA).40-42i78 Given the factorization (93), the problem of formulating a 
fully direct CI procedure can be turned into the problem of determining the 
one-electron coupling coefficients on-the-fly in the desired order. Knowles and 
Werner presented a way of doing this in 1988.1°2 They use the identity 
which holds for any orbital da which is always unoccupied. This hypothetical 
orbital, referred to as a LLghos"' orbital, does not actually appear in any of the 
integrals. The one-electron coupling coefficient becomes 
where the sum is over all spin couplings of the uniquely-specified orbital config- 
uration K. By fixing one of the two orbital indices, it becomes feasible to store 
the intermediates needed to evaluate the one-electron coupling coefficients effi- 
ciently in the desired order. This ghost-orbital technique was used by Werner 
and Knowles in their implementation of internally-contracted multireference 
CI.lol That method requires third- and fourth-order reduced density matrices, 
which can be evaluated by approaches analogous to (93). Another possibility 
along the lines of Siegbahn's internal/external factorization has been suggested 
by Malmqvist, Rendell, and Roos in their implementation of the RAS SCF 
method.56 They modify the GUGA method to split all walks into upper and 
lower portions and calculate coupling coefficients as products of upper and 
lower factors. Although the upper factors are not necessarily very simple for a 
RAS case, the storage requirements are substantially reduced in this approach. 
Finally, we note that many other important advances have been made in 
CSF-based approaches, even outside the context of direct CI. Much of this ef- 
fort in recent years has focused on extending the unitary and symmetric group 

--- PAGE 50 ---
192 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
approaches to the spin-dependent Hamiltonians needed to account for rela- 
tivistic effe~ts.~O~-~lO Examples of other work include specialized unitary group 
approaches for MRCI wavefunctions based on CAS references211 and applica- 
tion of the unitary group approach to CI calculations on atoms using Hylleraas 
 coordinate^^^ and to spin-adapted open-shell coupled-cluster theory.212 How- 
ever, we now turn our attention to determinant-based formulations of direct 
CI. 
4.2 Alpha and Beta Strings 
A 1980 paper by Handy44 represented a major advance in determinant-based 
CI, even though the paper was more concerned with how integrals and CI co- 
efficients are stored than with the computational advantages of determinants 
over CSFs. Handy realized that if determinants are used as N-electron ba- 
sis functions, and particularly if these determinants are expressed as “alpha 
strings” and “beta strings,” then the vector o can be evaluated very efficiently. 
Although Handy was the first to use alpha and beta strings, we will employ 
the subsequent notation of Olsen et uLd6 An alpha string is defined as an 
ordered product of creation operators for spin orbitals with alpha spin. If I, 
contains a list (2, j, . . . k} of the N, occupied spin orbitals with alpha spin in 
determinant II), then the alpha string a(],) is u~,u~,.. . ui,. A beta string is 
defined similarly. Thus a Slater determinant 11) in terms of alpha and beta 
strings is 
For example, consider the Slater determinant 11) = 1~1,~2,~3,~lp~2p~4p). 
Then the alpha string cr(I,) is given by 11) = la(IJP(43)) = 4AY)PVO)l). (96) 
and the beta string is given by 
Note that the order of the creation operators matters; if we swap the order of 
two creation operators within the alpha string (or within the beta string), then 
we introduce a sign change due to the anticommutation relation of creation 
operators. Also, applying the alpha string to the vacuum first, rather than the 
beta string, may introduce a minus sign, depending on the number of alpha 
and beta electrons. Typically, the beta string will be placed to the right of the 
alpha string in equations like (96). Further, within each string, orbitals are 
listed in strictly increasing order. 

--- PAGE 51 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 193 
Since a determinant is now specified by an ordered pair of indices rep- 
resenting its alpha and beta components, the Ith element of the CI vector 
becomes c(Ia,Ip). Note that this vector can also be considered as a matrix 
with coordinates I, and Ip. Both vector and matrix addressing schemes are 
computationally useful. The (T vector, 
can be written in the new notation as 
G, 43) = c (P(JP)4Jm) Ifil..(L)P(mc(Ja, JP), (100) 
Ja, JP 
where we have used HIJ = H;I and assumed that H is a real matrix to obtain 
the form most commonly seen in the literature when this notation is used. 
Handy realized the following advantages to alpha and beta strings: 
1. Direct CI methods often require an index vector which points to a list 
of all allowed excitations from a given N-electron basis function. Using 
alpha and beta strings, the index vector need not be the length of the 
GI vector-its size is dictated by the number of alpha or beta strings, 
which (for a full GI) is approximately the square root of the number of 
determinants. This results from the fact that in determinant-based CI, 
electrons in alpha spin-orbitals can be excited only to other alpha spin- 
orbitals, and electrons in beta spin-orbitals can be excited only to other 
beta spin-orbitals (because of the restriction to a single value of Ms). 
2. To form o(Ia,Io) in equation (loo), all functions Ia.(Ja)P(Jp)) which 
have non-zero matrix elements with l~(I~)/l(Ip)) are generated, one at a 
time, with the appropriate integral being looked up and multiplied by the 
appropriate GI coefficient. No time is wasted considering determinants 
which are noninteracting, and the coefficients of the integrals are easy to 
evaluate. 
3. Efficiency is increased by realizing that all integrals which enter the ex- 
pression (a(I,)P(Io) Ifila(J,)P(Io)) (equation loo), where a(Ja) differs 
from ~(1,) by two orbitals, are independent of P(I0). 
This approach allowed several benchmark full CI computations, including the 
first CI procedure (1981) to include more than one million  determinant^.^^^^^^ 

--- PAGE 52 ---
194 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
4.3 The Vectorized Full CI Algorithm of Knowles and 
Handy 
In 1984, Knowles and Handy introduced a new direct CI algorithm for full CI 
wavefun~tions.'~~~~'~ As Siegbahn had pointed the efficiency of direct 
CI algorithms is increased if, for a given IK), all one-electron coupling coeffi- 
cients yfiJ are available together. Examination of Siegbahn's expression for u 
elucidates this ob~ervation:~~ 
where the resolution of the identity has been used to turn the two-electron 
coupling coefficients into products of one-electron coupling coefficients (eq. 93). 
Notice that part of the two-electron contribution has been folded into the one- 
electron term. The remaining two-electron term is the time consuming part in 
the evaluation of UI, and it is most efficiently written as 
Thus this part of u~ can be evaluated by the following set of operations: 
The one-electron coupling coefficients would ordinarily be stored on disk, 
making the evaluation of the D and u quantities 1/0 intensive and thus ineffi- 
cient. However, Knowles and Handy noted that in a basis of determinants the 
one-electron coupling coefficients can be evaluated on-the-fly (direct CI) even 
in the general case. A given determinant IK) can interact with at most two 

--- PAGE 53 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 195 
other determinants II), and their contributions can be separated by rewriting 
the shift operator in y6K = (IlfiijlK) as 
where E$ replaces an a-spin electron in orbital j with an a-spin electron in 
orbital i (cf. section 2.3.2). Note that this approach requires a sum over a 
complete set of intermediate determinants IK) (or at least all determinants 
which interact with the allowed determinants through Eij), including those 
determinants with the wrong spatial symmetry. This means that the Knowles 
and Handy algorithm would be considerably less efficient for restricted CI. 
Given equation (108), it is possible to write the one-electron coupling co- 
efficients in terms of alpha and beta strings: 
yy = (a (I,) PVP) I I a (Ja 1 P(JP 1 ) 6 (43 JP 1 
+ (1.(r~fP(~P)l~~lfy(JLl)so>s(r,, Ja), (109) 
where Ia(1,)) is related to Ia(J,)) by a single excitation (and likewise for 
IP(Ip)) and IP(Jp))). Thus the one-electron coupling coefficients are gener- 
ated from lists of strings related by single excitations. For each alpha (beta) 
string, one stores a list of all allowed single replacements to other alpha (beta) 
strings; for closed-shell systems, the two lists will be identical and only one 
must be stored. Each list contains the address of the new string, the orbital 
index ij, and a phase factor, denoted by sgn(ij), which is fl. The sign can 
be determined as (-l)p, where p is the number of transpositions of creation 
operators needed to bring an excited string to its canonical form. String ad- 
dresses were computed by table lookups using a canonical addressing scheme 
explained in section 4.9.2. One can take advantage of the permutational sym- 
metries (zjlkl) = (jilkl) = (ijllk) = (jillk) of the two-electron integrals by 
requiring i 2 j, k 2 1. This entails replacing yEJ in (105) by (yEJ + yzJ), an 
analogous change for (1071, and a modification of the integrals to avoid double 
counting when i = j or k = 1. 
The algorithm of Knowles and Handy is described as “vectorized” because 
each of the three major operations (105)-(107) may be written as an opera- 
tion performed on an entire vector at once. This is very beneficial for vector 
supercomputers, which actually perform such operations a vector at a time 
and give substantial increases in speed. To illustrate, consider Fig. 6, which 
shows the Knowles-Handy algorithm for the formation of D, eq. (105). Due to 
memory limitations, operations are performed for a block of strings at a time. 
In the first half of Fig. 6, the operations in the innermost loop are identical 
but independent of each other for different KB. In the second half of the algo- 
rithm, the same applies to K,; hence, this operation can be performed for a 

--- PAGE 54 ---
196 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
Figure 6: Knowles-Handy Vectorized Formation of D (Refs. 109,214). 
whole range of Kp (K,) values simultaneously with a vector processor. These 
same considerations apply to the analogous eq. (107). The remaining (and 
most time consuming) step, (106), can be performed as a matrix multiplica- 
tion when one uses compound indices ij and kl, and of course this is also a 
vectorized operation. 
These concerns about vectorization remain relevant even though quantum 
chemists now perform a substantial fraction of their computations on worksta- 
tion machines which lack vector processors. Nevertheless, workstations (and 
now even personal computers, or PCs) feature pipelined processors. Pipelines 
allow machine instructions to overlap to some extent, giving the processor 
a limited ability to perform several tasks at once.166 The superscalar IBM 
RS/6000 POWER2 workstation processor has two floating point pipelines, 
each of which can hold up to twelve instructions. If the processor can keep 
a steady stream of independent instructions coming down the pipeline, then 
overall performance will be increased substantially. However, if one instruc- 
tion depends on results from another, then the pipeline can become stalled 
and performance is degraded. Since vectorizable code implies many similar 
but independent operations, as a general rule, vectorizable code becomes good 
pipelined code. 
The Knowles-Handy approach was expected to be very efficient on vector 
supercomputers, and indeed it enabled many important full CI benchmark 
 calculation^.^^ Nevertheless, one can see that this algorithm does more work 
than is strictly necessary. Equation (106) demonstrates that the operation 
count for the time-consuming step is approximately 4fidetn4, where n is the 
number of orbitals and @det is the number of interacting intermediate states, 

--- PAGE 55 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 197 
which may be larger than the number of determinants in the full CI space be- 
cause the intermediate states are not subject to spatial symmetry restrictions. 
The factor of a arises from the permutational symmetries of the integrals. 
As discussed previously in section 2.4.5, the computational cost of a full CI 
procedure should actually scale as C1(NdetN2n2). Thus, the Knowles-Handy 
algorithm replaces Ndet with the larger fidet, and N2 with the larger n2. Some 
of the extra work is due to the fact that the intermediate matrix D can con- 
tain a substantial number of zeros. For example, Dfi will be zero when K 
has orbital k unoccupied or orbital 1 doubly occupied (D becomes less sparse 
under the condition k 2 1). Even though matrix multiplications are ideal for 
vector computers, Olsen and co-~orkers~~ realized that abandoning the ma- 
trix formulation (105)-(107) might still lead to a faster algorithm due to the 
substantially reduced operation count. 
4.4 Olsen’s String-Based Full CI Algorithm 
In order to avoid the unnecessarily large operation counts in the full CI al- 
gorithm of Knowles and Handy, Olsen et al. abandoned the explicit use of a 
complete set of intermediate states and returned to some of Handy’s original 
(1980) ideas44 concerning string-driven full CI approaches. 
4.4.1 Full CI u Equations 
We begin by describing Olsen’s expressions for the u vector. In second quantized- 
form (cf. section 2.3.2), fi becomes 
Inserting this expression into that for u, eq. (loo), yields 
n 
g(la, I@) = (P(J@)a(Ja)I hk1kk;El 
Jm , Jp kl 
Now expanding the shift operators into their two spin components, Ekl = 
Efi + Efl, we write u as a sum of three terms:46 
ova, I@) = cJl(&k, I@) + QZ(L,I@) + u3(L, 431, (112) 

--- PAGE 56 ---
I98 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
where 
For efficient implementation, it is convenient to precompute the quantities 
Note that the first term (61) involves only beta shift operators, the second 
(02) involves only alpha shift operators, and the third (633) involves both al- 
pha and beta shift operators. These terms are also called the PP, acx, and 
ap Several determinant-based CI algorithms presented over the 
last few years83*183~215~216 have been based on this set of o equations or the 
analogous equations for restricted CI (see section 4.8.1). 
4.4.2 
Certain simplifications arise if the Ma = 0 component of an electronic state is 
used. The first of these is the time-reversal symmetry of the CI vector, which 
may be expressed as 
where S is the spin quantum number. Olsen et al. use this fact to show how 
the 02 contribution can be determined entirely from the o1 contribution when 
M, = 0.46 The remarkably simple result is Simplifications for Ms = 0 
C(L 43) = (-l)sc(Ip, Ia), (117) 
02(fa, ID) = (-V4p, Ad. (118) 

--- PAGE 57 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 199 
Likewise, it is also possible to show that the ijlcl-th component of c33 sat- 
isfies the relation 
(lfkl(I,, Ip) = (-1)%;yIp, I,). (119) 
This equation may be used to eliminate contributions from Ip > I, or (kl) > 
(ij), where (ij) and (kl) are compound indices. Olsen argues that the restric- 
tion I, 2 1p is to be preferred where this can be used to eliminate entire blocks 
of the (13 matrix. If all alpha/beta strings with the same irreducible representa- 
tion are grouped together, then states which are not totally symmetric in their 
molecular point group will have off-diagonal blocks which can be eliminated 
using this restriction. On the other hand, when applied to totally symmetric 
states, this restriction eliminates the upper half of each symmetry block of 03. 
Since this reduces the average vector length in the vectorized algorithm, Olsen 
recommends using the alternative restriction (ij) 2 (kl) in these cases. This 
may be accomplished by rewriting (13 as 
The M, = 0 simplifications therefore reduce computational expense by roughly 
a factor of two. 
One further observation must be made about the loss of spin symmetry in 
the CI vector in the iterative diagonalization of the Hamiltonian. Even very 
slight deviations from (1 17), such as might occur from roundoff errors, become 
magnified in subsequent iterations and cause the iteration procedure to become 
numerically unstable because precise adherence to (117) is assumed if any of 
the M, = 0 simplifications just described. If necessary, these difficulties can 
be avoided by explicitly enforcing the spin symmetry of any new vector in the 
subspace expansion. In this respect it is important to modify the diagonal 
elements of the Hamiltonian in the preconditioner for the subspace iteration 
method, as already discussed in section 3.2. 
4.4.3 Algorithms for Computing (1 
From (113), one can see that the mathematical operations required to form 
01 (I,, 10) are identical but independent of each other for different I,. That is, 

--- PAGE 58 ---
200 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
Figure 7: Olsen’s Vectorized Algorithm for 01 (Ref. 46). 
loop over beta strings Ip 
Zero array F 
~oop over excitations kfL from 1~(1p)) 
I P (KO 1 ) = sgn (kl) fi!l I P (4) ) 
FWs) = F(%) + sgnp)h‘,l 
LOOP over excitations E$ from IP(K~)) 
I P( Jp) ) = sgn (ij ) @j IPWs) ) 
F( Jp) = F( Jp) + (1/2)sgn(kl)sgn( ij) (ij I kl) 
end loop over E$ 
end loop over EEl 
loop over beta strings Jp and alpha strings I, 
end loop over I,, Jp Ol(&Y,Ip) = OI(Ia,Ip) + F(Jp)c(L, Jp); vect’d 
end loop over Ip 
column Ip of m1 can be constructed by two multiplications of scalars by columns 
(Jp) of c. Hence the construction of o1 is vectorizable over I,. The vectorized 
algorithm for the evaluation of 01, adapted from Olsen et a1.,46 appears in 
Figure 7. An analogous algorithm can be used to obtain 62. However, one can 
also obtain 02 for M, = 0 cases by (118). These algorithms require the same 
string replacement lists used by Knowles and Handylog (sec. 4.3). Note that 
the vector F is sparse, and multiplication of F by c should only take place for 
nonzero values of F. 
Unfortunately, the construction of 03 (115) is harder to vectorize. A sim- 
ple, non-vectorized algorithm for 03 is presented in Fig. 8. One can see that 
this does not appear as a simple set of arithmetic operations on vectors. For 
example, the contributions of the beta strings are not identical for different 
alpha strings because each alpha string connects to a different set of excited 
alpha strings with different indices k and 1. Olsen et al. remedy this by op- 
erating a fixed kl at a this makes their algorithm vectorizable in the 
innermost loop. Their algorithm, adapted and expanded from Ref. 46, is pre- 
sented in Fig. 9. Note that this algorithm also employs scatter/gather (Le., 
data rearrangement) operations to ensure that all of the data relevant to the 
multiplication step V = Fc’ are contiguous. This avoids “indirect addressing,” 
which could substantially degrade performance due to long waits for data to be 
fetched from scattered memory locations.166 For M, = 0, an improvement to 
the 03 algorithm can be made by utilizing equations discussed in section 4.4.2. 

--- PAGE 59 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 201 
Figure 8: Simple Algorithm for 03. 
Furthermore, if the integrals possess the full eightfold permutational symme- 
try, then Eg can be replaced by (gfi + ,??g)(l + &.I)-’ in order to increase the 
average vector length in the formation of V. Note once again that F is sparse. 
Clearly this algorithm takes less advantage of vector processors than the 
Knowles-Handy algorithm, since it involves some overhead (setup of the L 
and R arrays, and the scatter and gather) and uses smaller vector lengths. 
Nevertheless, one would expect this algorithm to be faster in many cases due 
to the substantially reduced number of mathematical operations performed. 
Counting only multiplications, the operation counts for each part of 0 are 
appr~ximately~~ 
(123) 
1124) 
N3 = NdetNaNp(n - N,)(n - Np). (125) 1 
1 
4 N1 M -N 4 det N2(n-Np)’ P 
Nz M -NdetN:(n- 
When N, = No, the overall operation count is thus approximately 
Recall that this operation count can be cut approximately in half for M, = 0 
cases. Knowles and Handy are also able to take advantage of time reversal sym- 
metry for singlet states, by employing the combinations 2-1/2(a(I,)p(Ip) + 
a(Ip)P(I,)). Recalling that the operation count for the Knowles-Handy al- 
gorithm is approximately fZ?detn4, we might expect the greatest savings for 
Olsen’s algorithm when n/N is large. 

--- PAGE 60 ---
202 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
Figure 9: Olsen’s Vectorized Algorithm for 03 (Ref. 46). 
loop over kl 
set up lists L(I), R(I), and sgn(I), such that 
loop over list entries I and beta strings Jp 
end loop over I and Jp 
loop over Ip I4W)l) = sgn(mlI4R(I)I) 
d(I, Jp) = c(L(I), Jp)sgn(I); vect’d gather 
zero array F 
loop over excitations E$ from Ip(~p)) 
F(Jp) = F(Jp) + sgn(ij)(ijlkl) IP(Jp)) = sgn(ij@$IP(Id) 
end loop over E$ 
loop over beta strings Jp and list entries I 
V(I) = F(Jp)d(I, Jp); vect’d over I 
end loop over Jp, I 
loop over list entries I 
end loop over I 03(R(I), Ip) = 03(R(I), Ip) + V(I); vect’d scatter 
end loop over Ip 
end loop over kl 

--- PAGE 61 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 203 
4.5 Zarrabian's Reduced Intermediate Space 
Shortly after the publication of the 1988 paper by Olsen et al., Zarrabian, 
Sarma, and Paldus presentedz1' an alternative approach to avoid the unnec- 
essarily large scaling of the Knowles-Handy full CI algorithm. These workers 
employed an (N - 2)-electron intermediate space for the two-electron contri- 
butions rather than an N-electron intermediate space. Their expressions for 
0 were originally derived using generators of the group S0(4), but to avoid 
introducing new notation we will consider the later derivation of Harrison and 
Zarrabian,47 which uses only the standard spin-orbital creation and annihila- 
tion operators. 
We begin by rewriting (24) over spatial orbitals, as 
Next, insert the resolution of the identity between the pairs of creation and 
annihilation operators in the two-electron term. Clearly, the sum must run 
over (N - 2)-electron states. The expression for 0 becomes 
where the superscripts (N) and (N - 2) denote the number of electrons for 
each state. The one-electron terms are exactly the same as before. The two- 
electron contributions to 0, denoted d2), may be written in terms of separate 
contributions from each possible spin case: 
n 
where the restrictions over the orbital indices in the and LT~ terms is made 
possible by the permutational symmetry of the integrals and the anticommu- 
tation relations of the creation and annihilation operators. Likewise, the two 

--- PAGE 62 ---
204 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
Figure 10: Harrison and Zarrabian’s Vectorized Algorithm for oi? (Ref. 47). 
loop over alpha strings I, 
loop over orbital pairs i > k (creation op.) 
define (N, - 2)-electron string K, 
loop over orbital pairs j > 1 (annihilation op.) la(K,)) = sgn(ik)ak,ai,Ia(Ia)) 
define new N,-electron string J, 
V = sgn(ik)sgn(jl)[(zjllcl) - (illlcj)] 
loop over beta strings I@ I a (J,)) = sgn (9) a!, ah I a (KO 1 ) 
oL?(Ip,Ia) = og(I@’L) +V*c(Ip,Ja) 
mixed contributions ap and pa have been combined in o$, eliminating the 
coefficient of 3. 
The algorithm for constructing ~22, adapted from Harrison and Zarra- 
biaq4’ is given in Fig. 10. The algorithm for o# is of course analogous. It is 
easy to show that the number of floating-point multiplications involved in the 
construction of of; and oL2 with this algorithm are 
(130) 
(131) 1 
1 
4 N1 = qNdetNp(Np-l)(n-Ng+2)(n-Ng+l) 
N2 = -NdetN,(N, - 1)(n - N, + 2)(n - N, + l), 
which are basically the same as the approximate operation counts (123)-(124) 
for Olsen’s algorithm.46 Harrison and Zarrabian point out that this algorithm 
can be parallelized over the outermost loop. Note that they address the CI 
vector with the beta string as the row index instead of the alpha string; the 
earlier paper by Zarrabian et al. used the alternative convention. This choice 
can have some relevance for ~22 and of; when only one of the terms is explicitly 
constructed (i.e., when M, = 0). In that case, it is best to access the data in 
C sequentially (i.e., with “unit stride”).166 
This yields an operation count4? of For of;, one can use a similar loop structure to that in Fig. 9 or Fig. 
N3 = NdetN,Np(n - N, + I)(. - Np + 1). (132) 
However, Harrison and Zarrabian suggest that for parallel-vector machines, it 
is better to revert to a matrix multiplication such as that used by Knowles 
and Handy.”’ This algorithm is produced in Fig. 11. These loops are run 

--- PAGE 63 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 205 
Figure 11: Harrison and Zarrabian’s Vectorized Algorithm for 0:; (Ref. 47). 
precompute info for adding orbs to (N, - 1)-elec. a string 
precompute info for adding orbs to (No - 1)-elec. P string 
zero D 
loop over orbitals I to be added to (N, - 1)-elec. string K, 
loop over orbitals j to be added to (No - 1)-elec. string KO 
loop over (N, - 1)-electron strings K, 
define N,-electron string J, 
loop over (No - 1)-electron strings Kp I Q (Ja) ) = sgn (I) 4, I Q (KO 1 ) 
define No-electron string Jp 
D(Kp, K,,jl) = D(Kp, Km,jl) + sgn(k)sgn(j)c(Jo, J,) I P (Jp )) = sgn (j 1 alp I P (Kp) ) 
end loop over Kb 
end loop over K, 
end loop over j 
end loop over 1 
call optimized matrix multiply for E~,ik = DK,jl(jllik) 
loop over orbitals k to be added to (N, - 1)-elec. string K, 
loop over orbitals i to be added to (Np - 1)-elec. string Kp 
loop over (N, - 1)-electron strings K, 
define N,-electron string I, 
loop over (Np - 1)-electron strings KO IQ(L)) = w(+L,la(K*)) 
I Q (1,) ) = sgn (k 1 4, I Q (G ) ) 
define No-electron string I0 
IP(IP)) = sgn(+4alP(Ko)) 
o$(I~, I,) = O$(I~, I,) + sgn(i)sgn(k)E(Kp, K,, ik) 
end loop over Kp 
end loop over K, 
end loop over i 
end loop over k 

--- PAGE 64 ---
206 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
for blocks of several intermediate states K at a time, and additional loops 
account for spatial symmetry. Note the use of two-electron integrals in Dirac 
notation rather than Mulliken notation; i.e., (jllik) = (ijlkl) for real integrals. 
Furthermore, the integrals are stored without any permutational symmetry. 
This algorithm has an operation count of 
N3 = NdetN,Npn4/(n - N, + l)(n - No + l), (133) 
which can be obtained47 by using N,/(n- N, + 1) as the ratio of the number of 
(N, - 1)-electron strings to the number of N-electron strings (and by ignoring 
spatial symmetry). Note that this operation count is not too much greater 
than that of the non-matrix version (132) when m >> N,, Np. In such cases, 
and given N, = Np, the overall number of multiplications Nl + Nz + N3 is 
about iNdetNin2, compared to !#detn4 for the Knowles-Handy algorithm. 
Although the work done by this algorithm is basically equivalent to that 
done in Olsen’s algorithm, Zarrabian et al. s~ggest~~~~~~ that their approach 
would be better suited for the evaluation of three- and four-electron reduced 
density matrices, which are important in the context of internally contracted 
MR-CISD.lO’ They also note that it should be possible to adapt their algo- 
rithm to restricted CI and some work along these general lines 
has been presented by Duc~.~~~ 
4.6 The Table-Based Algorithm of Bendazzoli and Evan- 
gelisti 
Using Handy’s alpha and beta string formalism,’14 along with some of the 
notation of Ol~en,~~ Bendazzoli and Evangelisti have presented a full CI algo- 
rithm48i49 which uses tables to represent the excitation operators EC. rather 
than the string replacement lists of Knowles and Handy. The operation count 
of their method is essentially the same as that of Olsen et aI.46 and of Zarra- 
bian et al.,’179217 but the data are organized differently and the authors note 
that their loop structure is more easily parallelized than that of Olsen et aZ.46 
The algorithm of Bendazzoli and E~angelisti~~ for 01 (which they call the /3/3 
term), is presented in Figure 12. When M8 = 0,az can be obtained from (118) 
just as in Olsen’s approach.46 
The tables OOVV represent the shift operator products E$E&; for a given 
set of orbitals (i, j, Ic, I), OOVV(i, j, 1, k) gives a list of all beta strings with or- 
bitals i, j occupied and I, Ic unoccupied. This is the list of all strings which can 
be acted on to the left by the shift operator product. Similarly, OOVV(I, Ic, i, j) 
gives a list of all strings which can be acted on to the right by this same prod- 
uct. The clever aspect of this approach is that the Ith entry of OOVV(i,j, I, Ic) 
(denoted I1) is the same as the string produced by applying E$E$ to the Ith 

--- PAGE 65 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 207 
Figure 12: Bendazzoli and Evangelisti's Algorithm for a1 (Ref. 48). 
loop over i > j, k > 1 v = (ikljl) - (illjk) 
loop over I = 1, length of list OOVV(i, j, k, I) 
I1 = Ith entry of list OOVV(i, j, 1, k) 
5'1 = sign associated with Il 
VS=VtS1 
I2 = Ith entry of list OOVV(1, k, i,j) 
loop over J = 1, number of alpha strings 
a(J,Iz) =o(J,I~)+c(J,I~)*VS 
end loop over J 
end loop over I 
end loop over i, j, k, 1 
element of OOVV(1, k, i, j) (denoted 12). Bendazzoli and Evangelisti have so 
far limited their attention to full CI; for restricted CI, the size of the lists 
OV and UOVV will rapidly become large relative to the size of the CI vector 
(sec. 4.9.4), so that these lists are probably appropriate only for full CI. 
The c~3 algorithm is presented in Figure 13. Note the same scatter/gather 
structure as in Figures 9 and 22. Like our own version (cf. section 4.9.5), 
this algorithm eliminates the F array and uses a DAXPY operation'@ in the 
innermost loop. Compared to the algorithm in Figure 22, our initial attempts 
to implement this algorithm for a3 yielded a program running roughly 50% 
slower on the IBM RS/SOOO POWER2 model 3CT workstation. 
More recently, Evangelisti, Bendazzoli, and co-workers have developed a 
parallel implementation of their algorithm for the Cray T3D, a distributed 
memory ma~hine.~~~'~ The newest out-of-core version of their program allows 
the CI and D vectors to be processed one symmetry block at a time. To avoid 
storage of the diagonal of the Hamiltonian, they approximate it using orbital 
eigenvalues. Following OlsenB3 (sec. 3.2.2) , they minimize storage space by 
using only one CI vector and one c~ vector in their iterative diagonalization 
method, although the details of their iterative procedure differ somewhat from 
those of Olsen and co-workers. In 1996, this parallelized version was used 
on a 64-processor Cray T3D to obtainB4 the full CI wavefunction for Be2, 
with all electrons correlated and using a 9s2pld basis (derived from a 4s2pld 
AN0 basis by uncontracting the primitive Gaussians corresponding to the 
five largest coefficients in the first AN0 orbital). This represents the first 
converged CI calculation requiring more than one billion Slater determinants 

--- PAGE 66 ---
208 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
Figure 13: Bendazzoli and Evangelisti’s Algorithm for 03 (Ref. 48). 
loop over k, 1 
loop over I = 1, length of list OV(l, k) 
I2 = Ith entry of OV(1, k) 
S2 = sign associated with I2 
loop over J = 1, number of beta strings 
end loop over J ~‘(1, J) = ~(12, J) * S2 
end loop over I 
loop over i,j v = (ijlkl) 
loop over J = 1, length of list OV(i,j) 
J1 = Jth entry of OV(i,j) 
J2 = Jth entry of OV(j, i) 
Sz = sign associated with J2 vs=v*s2 
loop over I = 1, length of OV(Z, k) 
end loop over I d(I, J2) = d(I, J2) + c’(I,J~) * VS 
end loop over J 
end loop over i, j 
loop I = 1, length of list OV(1, k) 
I1 = Ith entry of OV(1, k) 
loop J = 1, number of beta strings 
end loop over J O(I1, J) = d(I, J) 
end loop over I 
end loop over k, 1 

--- PAGE 67 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 209 
(an unconverged calculation on the Mg atom involving more than a billion 
determinants was reported in 1990 by Olsen, J~rgensen, and Sim~ns~~). 
4.7 Approximate Full CI Methods 
In 1989, Knowles introducedE1 a modified full CI procedure which exploits the 
sparsity of the Hamiltonian matrix and affords approximate full CI results at a 
dramatically reduced computational cost. Employing the Davidson methodlo8 
(cf. section 3.2.1), the correction to the current CI vector is given by 
where rI is the residual UI - Eel. Knowles estimates the importance of these 
corrections using the following simple expression inspired by second-order per- 
turbation theory : 
If IAEII is less than some threshold, Aq is neglected. Thus far fewer de- 
terminants are actually included in the correction vector, which is stored on 
disk in a packed format. One problem with this approach is that neglected 
corrections Aq can reappear during the standard Schmidt orthogonalization 
against previous subspace vectors (cf. section 3.2). Knowles thus avoids the 
Schmidt orthogonalization step and employs a non-orthogonal space of expan- 
sion vectors. This allows for tight control over the size of the expansion space 
vectors. 
A potential difficulty of this approach is that the o vectors (which must also 
be stored) are not necessarily sparse. Knowles notes81 that even when c is only 
1% populated, typically 50% of a will be nonzero. Nevertheless, in order to 
obtain variationally correct energies, the full a vector must be formed in core 
memory and its dot product taken with all expansion vectors c. However, once 
this is done, the only further use of u is in the construction of new subspace 
vectors; hence, Knowles only writes to disk those elements of u greater than 
some threshold. According to (134)-(135), these neglected elements of 0 would 
only contribute to elements of Ac which make very small energy contributions. 
Given the Knowles-Handy full CI algorithm of section 4.3, it is clear that 
the matrix formulation no longer applies with a sparse CI vector c. Instead, the 
the formation of a is driven from the list of nonzero elements in c, employing 
scatter and gather operations to obtain some vectorization in the innermost 
loops; this approach is therefore similar to the original string-driven approach 
of Handy44 or the subsequent aIgorithm of Olsen et uE.~~ To avoid core storage 
problems, the exact D can be formed one symmetry block at a time (where 
a symmetry block of a contains all elements UI having the same alpha string AEI = rIAcl. (135) 

--- PAGE 68 ---
21 0 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
symmetry). Memory requirements can be further reduced, with some loss in 
efficiency, by processing 4 in smaller batches of arbitrary size." 
Knowles and Handy demonstrated the power of this approach by estimating 
the full CI energy of NH3 in an atomic natural orbital (ANO) basis set of DZP 
quality.21s The full CI expansion contains more than 209 million determinants, 
yet Knowles and Handy were able to obtain an apparently reliable variational 
energy of -56.4235 hartree using a CI vector with only 665,247 nonzero elements 
(0.3% of the full CI vector). Employing perturbation theory to estimate the 
remaining energy error (presumably via equation 135), Knowles and Handy 
arrived at a final estimate of -56.4236 * 0.0001 hartree.'le 
Using perturbation theory to estimate the importance of determinants in 
configuration interaction is a very old idea (see Ref. 57 for a detailed review). 
Indeed, it is perturbation theory which provides the justification for truncating 
the CI space at only singles and doubles from one or several references (i.e., 
the CISD and MR-CISD methods). The CIPSI method (1973) of Huron, Mal- 
rieu, and Rancurelg2 diagonalizes the Hamiltonian in some subspace of selected 
determinants and uses the resulting eigenvector as the zeroth-order wavefunc- 
tion in a subsequent perturbation theory treatment. Determinants having a 
contribution to the first-order wavefunction greater than some threshold r] are 
added to the selected CI space, and this process is repeated until the selec- 
tion threshold is considered acceptably small or until the selected CI space 
becomes too large to handle. The effect of unselected determinants is evalu- 
ated by second-order perturbation theory. The procedure of Knowles81i218 is 
similar to this, but differs in two important respects: first, Knowles selects de- 
terminants based on a perturbative estimate of their contribution to the energy 
rather than to the first-order wavefunction, and second, Knowles applies the 
selection during the Davidson procedure, whereas CIPSI solves the CI prob- 
lem exactly for each selected CI space. A more recent version of the CIPSI 
methodg3 is somewhat more flexible and introduces a third class of determi- 
nants of intermediate importance; interacting determinants with an estimated 
CI coefficient less than r] but greater than a second threshold T can be treated 
by higher-order perturbation theory or variationally, while those with contri- 
butions less than r are treated by second-order perturbation theory as before. 
The CIPSI scheme should yield wavefunctions approaching the full CI limit, 
and indeed it has been benchmarked against full CI.9311221123,215,219 The most 
recent studies have added a self-consistent dressing of the Hamiltonian matrix 
to ensure size con~istency.'~~~~~~ 
Another long-established approach to approximating full CI is to employ 
successively larger MR-CISD spaces. Since the size of the CI space grows very 
rapidly as the number of references is increased, Buenker and Peyerimhoff 
(1974-5)"* l1 suggested retaining only the most important singly and doubly 

--- PAGE 69 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 21 1 
substituted configurations and treating discarded configurations by Brillouin- 
Wigner perturbation theory and extrapolation procedures; they call their pro- 
cedure MRD-CI. Their strategy implies that the most compact wavefuntions 
are obtained by truncating the singles and doubles space rather than the ref- 
erence space, and indeed CIPSI studies support this idea.122*219 Unlike the 
CIPSI method, Buenker and Peyerimhoff do not use perturbation theory in the 
configuration selection; rather, orbital configurations are accepted or rejected 
on the basis of the energy lowering they cause when added to the reference 
space. A separate small CI procedure is required for each possible spatial or- 
bital configuration. Although this may require somewhat more effort than the 
perturbational estimates of CIPSI, the energy lowerings can be reused in the 
extrapolations to zero threshold.lOill Alternative approaches to making MR- 
CISD more computationally tractable are the internal and external contraction 
schemes discussed in section 2.4.2. 
Knowled 1989 programs1~218 was able to approach the full CI limit more 
closely than selected CI methods such as MRD-CI and CIPSI because it was 
efficient enough to treat a much larger number of determinants variationally. 
Subsequently in 1992, Povill, Rubio, and Illas noted215 that the principal diffi- 
culty with the standard CIPSI program was its need to store the Hamiltonian 
matrix H, allowing it to handle no more than 50,000 determinants variation- 
ally. Hence, they presented215 the direct selected configuration interaction 
using strings (DISCIUS) algorithm employing the alpha and beta string formal- 
ism of Handy;44 the notation, ((YCY, @@, a@) spin decomposition, and M, = 0 
simplifications of Olsen et ~1.;~~ and the reduced intermediate space of Zarra- 
bian et ~1.~~1~'~ Special ordering and addressing schemes, which make use of 
large index arrays, allow for some degree of vectorization despite the lack of a 
well-defined structure in the CI space.215 Nevertheless, a more recent (1995) 
version of this algorithm by Povill and Rubio220 largely abandons the vector- 
ization of (13, noting that the average vector length for selected CI spaces is 
generally too small for effective vectorization. These authors also found that 
too much time is spent checking to see if doubly excited strings in the construc- 
tion of o1 or a2 belong to the selected space; hence, they consider every pair 
of allowed strings and determine all single and double excitations connecting 
them. The DISCIUS algorithm is capable of treating selected CI spaces with 
more than one million determinants.220 
A related algorithm, which has also been coupled to the CIPSI approach, 
was presented by Caballol and Malrieu221 in 1992. Their approach is also direct 
and determinant-based, but the strings are written as particle-hole excitations 
from a single reference state; the program is named SCIEL, for selected CI with 
excitation labeling. For a determinant with excitation level m, the particle-hole 
labeling lists m holes and m particles. This is inefficient for full CI,221 since 

--- PAGE 70 ---
21 2 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
it would require the listing of 2N, orbitals for a maximally-excited (rn = N,) 
alpha string, rather than only N, orbitals in the standard approach. However, 
for CI spaces dominated by determinants with a relatively low excitation level, 
this formalism could offer some benefits. Povill et al. have commented that 
the DISCIUS and SCIEL programs seem to have similar efficiencies.”’ 
Similar improvements have been made to the MRD-CI program of Buenker 
and Peyerimhoff ,lo$ l1 which was previously limited to about 50,000 configura- 
tions.222 In 1995, Krebs and Buenker presented222 a new table-direct CI al- 
gorithm for use in the MRD-CI selection scheme which is capable of handling 
variational spaces including at least several hundred thousand determinants. 
Knowles’ 1989 sparse CI method has been the subject of additional study in 
the last few years. In 1994, Mitrushenkov presented a very similar methodLs3 
which differs primarily in that it selects components of the CI vector based 
on their magnitude (134) and not on their expected energy lowering (135). 
This choice was motivated by the belief that it would yield more physical CI 
vectors less likely to give errors for properties other than the total energy.ls3 
Mitrushenkov described how to adapt Olsen’s full CI algorithm to implement 
his approach, which he has called dynamic CI. Of particular interest is his 
technique for avoiding core storage of the entire D vector: he calculates u(Ia, 10) 
for a fixed I, (i.e., the algorithm is driven by CJ rather than by nonzero elements 
of c). The exact D values are used to update the Hamiltonian in the small 
Davidson subspace, and then components larger than a given cutoff are written 
to disk. Like Knowles, Mitrushenkov uses a nonorthogonal Davidson subspace; 
however, he uses only two vectors and employs the improved preconditioner 
of Olsen et aLs3 (cf. section 3.2.2). Mitrushenkov reported results for NH3, 
HzO, and Mg test cases,183 but unfortunately no results were presented for 
systems where the exact full CI result was known (DZP NH3 full CI results 
have subsequently been rep~rted,~~?~~ see below). 
In 1991, Harrison emphasized the use of second-order perturbation theory 
to approach the full CI results more rapidly.223 In Harrison’s method, denoted 
CI+PT, one chooses an initial reference space (perhaps a single determinant), 
and an initial selection threshold r]. A CI is performed in the reference space, 
yielding eigenvectors for all roots of interest. Unlike most of the other algo- 
rithms discussed in this section, Harrison’s program employs CSFs rather than 
determinants; two-electron coupling coefficients are evaluated as products of 
one-electron coupling coefficients, which in turn are evaluated by the method of 
Knowles and Wernerlo2 (see section 4.1). For every configuration I interacting 
with (but not included in) the reference space, the second-order perturbation 
theory energy contribution is determined for each of the desired roots k, using 

--- PAGE 71 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 
the selected-space eigenvectors ck as zeroth-order solutions: 213 
The set of all configurations I with IAEFI > 77 is added to the reference space, 
and the new Hamiltonian is diagonalized; this process is repeated until no 
new important configurations are found. The reference selection is thus self- 
consistent, and Harrison noteszz3 that typically only two iterations are re- 
quired. The sum of the estimated energy lowerings (136) provides a perturba- 
tive correction for excluded configurations, and the total energy (variational 
energy plus perturbative correction) is an approximation to the full CI energy. 
An increasingly accurate sequence of wavefunctions is generated by repeating 
this whole process for a series of thresholds 77 with decreasing values. Note, 
however, that those configurations which do not interact directly with any 
reference function are completely neglected. Although the individual contri- 
butions of such configurations should be very small, there are a large number 
of them. Harrison finds that the CI+PT method approaches the full CI en- 
ergy from above, suggesting that the error due to the neglect of noninteracting 
configurations is greater than the error due to the perturbative estimates of 
configurations which are interacting but not included in the reference space 
(the latter correction, being nonvariational, could conceivably lead to energies 
below the full CI limit). Harrison's approach is similar to the original two- 
class CIPSI algorithm,g2 but it selects references based on their contributions 
to the energy rather than to the first-order wavefunction; Harrison notes that 
for properties other than the energy, this might not be the optimal 
An advantage of his program was that it could handle larger variational spaces 
than the versions of the CIPSI and MRD-CI programs available at that time 
(recent improvements in these programs are described above). Results for HzO, 
0, and 0- were compared to full CI and indicate that the perturbation theory 
energy correction rapidly accelerates convergence to the full CI energy. For 
example, the full CI energy for H20 at three different geometries was obtained 
within 0.1 kcal mol-' with a variational reference space and perturbative in- 
teracting space spanning less than 0.23% and 25%, respectively, of the full CI 
space (these results correspond to a selection threshold of 77 = 4 x loM7). 
The wavefunction operator (WFO) approach of Luzanov, Wulfov, and 
Krouglov ( 1992)224 seems to be the same as Harrison's CI+PT approach, al- 
though it is formulated differently and implemented using determinants. This 
method appears to involve the same amount of work as other determinant- 
based sparse CI methods,z15~220~z21 but it uses rather different intermediate 
arrays. Explicit algorithms for the WFO method were presented in 1996 by 
W~lfov,~~~ who obtained results for HF dimer in a 4s3pld/2slp basis using a 

--- PAGE 72 ---
21 4 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
personal computer (PC) equipped with only 16 megabytes (MB) of RAM and 
50 MB of disk space. The largest computation, with threshold 77 = con- 
sidered 65,751 determinants variationally and treated an unreported number 
of interacting determinants perturbatively. 
Perturbation theory corrections to variational energies have also been con- 
sidered recently by Mitrushenkov and Dmitriev (1995),2'6 who express the 
second-order energy correction as 
= (cO,I?Ac), (137) 
where co is the current CI vector and Aco is the correction vector. The term 
Hz(Ia, Ip) is the diagonal element of the Hamiltonian for determinant Ilalp), 
and the subscript sa indicates an average over all determinants with the same 
spatial orbital configuration (cf. section 3.2.1). This correction is essentially 
the same used by Harrison223 and others. Rather than employ this expression 
exactly as it is, Mitrushenkov and Drnitriev note216 that for a converged full 
CI vector c = co + Ac, the full CI energy can be expressed as: 
Mitrushenkov and Dmitriev designate this the norm-consistent zero threshold 
full CI estimate. When Ac is orthogonal to c, this is the second-order per- 
turbation theory estimate (137). However, since selection in the dynamic CI 
occurs during the subspace iteration process, Ac and c are not orthogonal. Of 
course the exact 00 and Ac must be used in the evaluation of (138); these are 
evaluated for fixed Ip as described above. Mitrushenkov and Dmitriev demon- 
strated this zero threshold energy (ZTE) estimate for Ne, NHS, Mg, and HzO; 
for Ne, comparisons with full CI indicate that the ZTE estimates approach 
the correct energy much faster than the variational energies with respect to 
decreasing threshold, but the approach is not monotonic and can occur from 
below. Very recently, Mitrushenkov has extended this approach to perform 
the dynamic CI+ZTE in the active space and to treat the external space using 
only second-order perturbation theory.226 
In order to compare some of these selected CI methods, we present results 
for DZP NH3 in Table 5. These results were obtained in point group C, with 
the la' core orbital frozen (i.e., constrained to remain doubly occupied). The 

--- PAGE 73 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 215 
Table 5: Selected and Full Configuration Interaction Benchmarks for NH3 with 
an AN0 DZP Basis Set.a 
&I- NPT ECI+PT- 
Threshold Ncr ECI EFCI x106 ECI+PT EFCI 
Knowles and Handy, Ref. 218:* 
2.0 x lop4 171 867 -56.4219 0.0021 n/a -56.4220 0.0020 
1.0 x lop4 393 666 -56.4229 0.0011 n/a -56.4230 0.0010 
5.0 x 450 763 -56.4232 0.0008 n/a -56.4234 0.0006 
4.0 x lop5 665 247 -56.4235 0.0005 n/a -56.4236 0.0004 
Harrison, Ref. 223:' 
1.0 x 10-4 786 -56.390631 0.033376 0.61 -56.422854 0.001153 
1.3 x 10-5 1 889 -56.411996 0.012011 1.04 -56.423766 0.000241 
1.6 x lop6 5 814 -56.417497 0.006510 2.93 -56.423748 0.000259 
3.9 x lo-' 18 921 -56.420203 0.003804 5.92 -56.423719 0.000288 
2.0 x lo-' 32 288 -56.421211 0.002796 7.68 -56.423737 0.000270 
Povill et al., Ref. 123:' 
6.0 x lop6 1.00 x lo6 -56.423659 0.000348 2.49 -56.423681 0.000326 
0.4 x 1.17 x lo6 -56.423785 0.000222 6.55 -56.423824 0.000183 
0.1 x 1.25 x lo6 -56.423825 0.000182 15.10 -56.423875 0.000132 
Mitrushenkov and Dmitriev, Refs. 183, 216:b>e 
1.0 x 10-3 2 000 -56.4085 0.0155 n/a -56.42397 0.00004 
1.0 x lop4 34 000 -56.4195 0.0045 n/a -56.42392 0.00009 
1.0 x 590 000 -56.4235 0.0005 n/a -56.42400 0.00001 
'Bmis set and geometry of Ref. 218. Only valence electrons are correlated. Ncr 
denotes the size of the variational space, and NPT denotes the size of the 
interacting space treated by second-order perturbation theory. All energies are 
given in hartree. 
*Number of nonzero elements in final CI vector. 
'Dimensions are given in CSFs instead of determinants. 
'The CIPSI algorithm uses two thresholds, q and 7. q is given, and 7 = 10-l'. 
eMitrushenkov reports the number of nonzero elements in the CI vector as a 
percentage of the full CI space (209 626 425 determinants); the NCI values given 
are thus only approximate. 

--- PAGE 74 ---
21 6 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
first highly accurate NH3 benchmark using a basis set this large was that 
of Knowles and Handy in their 1989 demonstration of their new selected CI 
method.21s Hence, most subsequent selected CI benchmarks on this system 
have used their geometry and atomic natural orbital basis set. An exception is 
the wavefunction operator (WFO) benchmark,224 which employed a different 
basis set; that method is therefore excluded from the table. The exact full 
CI energy of NH3 with this basis set was unavailable when these selected CI 
benchmarks were published, and the Knowles-Handy218 extrapolated selected 
CI estimate of -56.4236 hartree has sometimes been used in place of the full 
CI value. The apparent convergence of this estimate led Knowles and Handy 
to propose error bars of fO.OOO1 hartree. However, in 1994 Povill et al.lZ3 
used the 3-class CIPSI methodg3 to select the most important 1.25 million 
determinants and obtained a variational energy of -56.423825 hartree using 
the DISCIUS algorithm.215 This energy is lower than the lowest estimate of 
Knowles and Handy, including the error bar. This difficulty was cleared up 
in 1995 by Evangelisti et u~.,~O who used the full CI program of Bendazzoli 
and Evangeli~ti~~9~~ to obtain an energy of -56.424007 hartree (this same value 
was obtained independently by OlsensO). This demonstrates that the energy 
of Knowles and Handy was not converged as tightly as expected, and that 
it is easy to underestimate the importance of a large number of neglected 
determinants. 
The data in Table 5 show that the perturbation theory corrected energies 
are better approximations to the full CI energy than the purely variational 
results, and that the full CI energy is always approached from above; these 
conclusions are in general agreement with previous benchmarks for smaller 
sy~tem~.~~~~’~~~~~~~~~ However, we note that the perturbation theory corrections 
become less effective for large variational spaces, and conversely, the CI+PT 
energies are slowly convergent (and not monotonic) with the relatively small 
CI spaces used in Harrison’s studyzz3 (note, however, that Harrison’s Ncr 
values are in CSFs rather than determinants, making his variational space 
look smaller than it actually is). The norm-consistent zero threshold energies 
of Mitrushenkov and Dmitriev216 appear particularly effective, although they 
do not approach the full CI energy monotonically. 
Table 5 demonstrates that it is difficult to establish the convergence of the 
energy for selected CI methods. Another problem which has received rela- 
tively little attention is the convergence of properties other than the energy. It 
would be expected that other properties should not converge as quickly with 
respect to the size of the CI space as the energy (cf. section 2.2), particularly 
for selected CI methods which use an energy selection criterion rather than a 
coefficient criterion. However, a 1992 study by Cave, Xantheas, and Feller227 
used a selected CI method which is similar to the two-class CIPSIg2 method but 

--- PAGE 75 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 217 
uses energy-based selection. These authors came to the remarkable conclusion 
that most one-electron properties considered in their study (including isotropic 
hyperfine values and dipole and quadrupole moments) converged even more 
rapidly than the energy.227 Additionally, WulfovZz8 has recently considered 
the convergence of the equilibrium geometries and harmonic vibrational fre- 
quencies of several diatomic molecules as a function of the selection threshold 
value.224i225 The convergence of these properties could not be firmly estab- 
lished due to the lack of corresponding exact full CI values; however, a recent 
full CI benchmark study by our groupzz9 on C2 and CN’ finds only very small 
errors in Wulfov’s best CISPT geometries and frequencies (less than 0.001 A 
and 4.0 cm-’, respectively). 
4.8 Restricted Active Space CI 
Rather than select individual determinants based on computational estimates 
of their importance, one might instead select entire classes of determinants 
which are expected a priori to be important based on their partitioning of 
electrons among various orbital subspaces. This is the motivation behind the 
truncation of the CI space according to “excitation level” (how many electrons 
are placed in the virtual subspace) and the second-order CI (SOCI),13 which 
includes all determinants with at most two electrons in the external subspace. 
Such CI selection schemes were described in general terms by Sha~itt,~~ who 
defined the full class CI as one which partitions the orbitals into an arbi- 
trary number of orthogonal subsets and includes all or none of the N-electron 
functions which have a given partitioning of electrons among the subspaces. 
As Shavitt points out, a full-class CI wavefunction is invariant to separate, 
nonsingular linear transformations within any of the orbital subspaces. 
A benefit of such class selection schemes is that the CI space exhibits a 
regular structure which can be used to advantage in computational implemen- 
tations. Additionally, it appears to be easier to gauge the general reliability of 
wavefunctions obtained using class selection schemes as opposed to individual 
selection. However, class selection methods will invariably include some less 
important determinants and therefore cannot yield wavefunctions as compact 
as those from an individual selection method. 
A specialization of the full class CI which uses only three orbital subspaces 
is the Restricted Active Space (RAS) CI approach introduced by Olsen et 
al.46 in 1988 along with the string-based full CI algorithm already discussed 
(section 4.4). The three subspaces are labeled I, 11, and 111, and the CI space 
is limited by requiring a minimum of p electrons in RAS I and a maximum of 
q electrons in RAS 111 (cf. Figure 14). There are no restrictions on the number 
of electrons in RAS 11, and thus it is analogous to the complete active space 

--- PAGE 76 ---
218 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
(CAS). There may be an additional frozen core subspace in which each orbital 
is constrained to remain doubly occupied; these core electrons and orbitals 
need not be treated explicitly in the RAS procedure (cf. section 2.4.7). The 
full CI space may be obtained as the maximum limit of the RAS space. The 
focus of Olsen’s paper was on the utility of the RAS method in limiting the 
size of CI calculations, but thus far its maximum impact has been on the 
development of determinant-based full CI  algorithm^.^^^ lE3 
Figure 14: Orbital partitioning and configuration selection in the Restricted 
Active Space Configuration Interaction method. The CI space includes all 
determinants in which at least p electrons are in RAS I and at most q electrons 
are in RAS 111. 
RAS I11 
RAS I1 max q electrons 
Any CI space truncated according to excitation level may be formulated 
within the RAS CI framework the occupied orbitals are placed in RAS I, 
and the unoccupied orbitals are placed in RAS 111, and the RAS I1 subspace 
is absent. The maximum number of electrons in RAS I11 is set equal to the 
maximum excitation level, and the minimum number of electrons in RAS I is 
simply the total number of electrons N minus the maximum excitation level. 
A full CI can be obtained by applying trivial restrictions, such as a minimum 
of zero electrons in RAS I and a maximum of N electrons in RAS 111. 
One may also formulate excitation class selected MR-CI spaces within the 
RAS framework. A SOCI can be obtained by setting RAS I equal to the active 
space, deleting RAS 11, allowing a maximum of two electrons in RAS 111, and 
requiring a minimum of N - 2 electrons in RAS I. Alternatively, this same CI 
space may be constructed by placing the virtual orbitals of the active space 
in RAS 11, allowing a maximum of two electrons in RAS 111, and requiring 
zero electrons in RAS I. To obtain the CISD[TQ] wavefunction mentioned in 
section 2.4.2, one places occupied orbitals in RAS I and virtual active space 

--- PAGE 77 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 21 9 
Figure 15: Two formulations of the SOCI wavefunction within the RAS CI 
method. 
I11 
I max 2 
min N - 2 max 2 
min 0 
orbitals in RAS 11. A maximum of two electrons are allowed in RAS 111, and 
a minimum of N - 4 electrons are required in RAS I (cf. Figure 16). Some 
possibilities of extending the RAS selection scheme are discussed in section 
4.8.3. 
Figure 16: 
method. Formulation of the CISD[TQ] wavefunction within the RAS 
I1 
I 
The RAS CI algorithm of Olsen et relies on Handy’s separation of de- 
terminants into alpha and beta strings (cf. section 4.2). As in other determinant- 
based CI methods, the determinants are restricted to those having a given value 
of Ms. Since the number of electrons N is also fixed, this means that the alpha 
and beta strings always have constant lengths of N, and Np, respectively. For 
a full CI, one forms all possible alpha and beta strings for a given N, and Np, 

--- PAGE 78 ---
220 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
and the determinants employed are all possible combinations of these alpha 
and beta strings. In a RAS CI wavefunction, the CI space is restricted in 
two ways: first, not all alpha and beta strings are allowed, and secondly, not 
all combinations of alpha and beta strings to form determinants are accepted. 
This is best understood from an example: consider the case of 6 orbitals, with 
N, = Np = 3. If orbitals 4, 5, and 6 constitute RAS 111, with a maximum 
of 2 electrons allowed, then clearly alpha strings such as aa,ai,ai, are not al- 
lowed. Similarly, even though afuaaaaea and ~,~a,~a,~ are allowed alpha and 
beta strings, these strings cannot be combined with each other because the 
resulting determinant would place four electrons in RAS 111. 
If the CI coefficient vector is viewed as a matrix, c(I,, Ip), then these re- 
strictions, as well as those due to point-group symmetry, can be implemented 
by allowing only certain blocks of c to be nonzero. If strings with the same 
irreducible representation are numbered consecutively, then only those blocks 
of the CI coefficient matrix with the correct overall symmetry (determined as 
the direct product of the alpha and beta string irreducible representations) 
are allowed to be nonzero. For the RAS restrictions, it is convenient to assign 
a particular code to each alpha and beta string which represents the distri- 
bution of electrons among the RAS orbital subspaces. This means that the 
allowed combinations of strings may be determined directly from their respec- 
tive codes. In Olsen’s nornenclat~re,~~ these codes correspond to different 
string graphs; string representation and addressing is discussed further in sec- 
tion 4.9. If strings with a given code (or within a given graph) are numbered 
consecutively, then the allowed combinations of strings become allowed sub- 
blocks of the symmetry blocks in the CI coefficient matrix. These are referred 
to henceforth as the RAS subblocks. For a full CI, one can group all strings 
belonging to the same irreducible representation in the same graph, so that 
the RAS subblocks are the same as the symmetry blocks. ttt 
4.8.1 RAS CI (T Equations 
The products of shift operators in equations (113) and (114) mean that some 
alpha/beta strings can contribute to the B vector even if they are not necessary 
to describe the CI space. Therefore the string lists must include all valid 
strings and all the singly substituted strings derived from them. For a full CI, 
all possible strings for a given number of alpha/beta electrons are allowed, so 
all singly substituted strings are automatically present. For a restricted CI, 
however, including all singly substituted strings is an inefficient procedure. 
Olsen et al. showed46 how to eliminate the contributions from these “out- 
of-space” strings for the case of a RAS CI wavefunction. Since the equation for 
(53 (115) contains no products of shift operators, only cr1 and (52 can contain 

--- PAGE 79 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 221 
contributions from out-of-space strings. Moreover, since 02 is analogous to 
01 (and can be derived from it for M, = 0 cases), it is sufficient to focus on 
01. Olsen’s approach is to change the sum over i, j, k, I into a restricted sum, 
(ij) 2 (kl), where (ij) and (kl) are canonical indices defined as 
(ij) = in + j, (139) 
if there are n orbitals and the numbering starts from zero. Consider the term 
c c (P( JP) I k!j 2il IP(4) ) (ij I kl)c(L 1 513). (140) 
Jo (ij)?(kl) 
An out-of-space string Kp can only contribute if it is produced by k[llp(Ip)), 
and if Et transforms it back into an allowed string (Jp). But if the orbitals 
are numbered consecutively within each RAS space, and if equation (139) is 
used to define the canonical index (ij), such contributions are impossible. For 
example, consider the case where a maximum of two electrons are allowed in 
RAS 111. If string Ip already contains two electrons in RAS 111, then a single 
replacement kfll/3(Ip)) which promotes a third electron to RAS I11 will yield 
an out-of-space string. The shift operator E; could produce an allowed string 
again if it moves any of the three electrons in RAS I11 back down into RAS I 
or RAS 11. However, if the summation over orbitals is restricted to (ij) 2 (kl), 
this is impossible, since k > i. 
Using the commutation relationship 
(141) [Eij, ^P E,,] -0 = t5kjEi - Silk&, 
one can rewrite (113) to employ this restriction. The result46 is: 
Ol(L 43) = c X(P(JP) I~ilIP(~P))gklC(L JP) (142) 
+ c c (P(Jp)lkt2illP(~~))(ijlkl)c(~~, JP)(1+ b(ij),(kl))-l, Jo kl 
Ja (ij)2(kl) 
where g is an asymmetric matrix defined as 
4.8.2 Algorithms for Computing 0 
The full CI algorithms must be modified to treat the more general RAS case. 
Most significantly, the o1 and 02 equations for RAS CI spaces differ from 

--- PAGE 80 ---
222 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
the full CI equations: (142) requires that the summation over orbitals obey 
(ij) 2 (kl) (recall that introducing this restriction into the full CI algorithm is 
one way to reduce effort when M, = 0). The other required modification is that 
the innermost loops must sum over allowed .combinations of alpha and beta 
strings only. For instance, the loop over I, near the end of the a1 algorithm 
in Figure 7 must be split into two loops: one over alpha string graphs, and 
another over strings within each graph. This allows for the sum over Jp to run 
over only those beta strings which are allowed to combine with strings from 
the current alpha string graph. Similar modifications must be made to the a2 
and a3 algorithms. 
It is perhaps not entirely obvious what is the most efficient way to adapt 
Olsen’s algorithms to account for point group symmetry and RAS restrictions. 
Although it is a relatively simple matter to introduce a loop over graphs in 
the multiplication of F by c or c‘, it is also necessary to introduce loops over 
graphs in earlier parts of the algorithm; otherwise, F can contain irrelevant 
entries. When the CI vector is processed a symmetry block at a time or a RAS 
subblock at a time, it seems best to place these loops over graphs within the 01, 
02, and a3 routines. However, when the CI vector is processed a RAS subblock 
at a time, these loops over graphs may be placed outside the o subroutines. 
Further details are presented in section 4.9. 
4.8.3 
Although many useful CI spaces can be obtained in the RAS CI method, it 
may nevertheless be beneficial to employ more complex CI spaces. Olsen has 
begun to investigate CI spaces formed as the union of two RAS spaces,8O while 
we have considered the addition of another orbital subspace.l’ As first pointed 
out by Grev and Schaefer,“ the most weakly occupied CISD natural orbitals 
contribute almost exclusively to singly and doubly substituted configurations, 
rather than to triples, quadruples, etc. This suggests the utility of extending 
the RAS method to include another orbital subspace, formed from the most 
weakly occupied natural orbitals. Labeling this new orbital set as “RAS IV” 
may be somewhat misleading, in the sense that the orbital index restriction 
(ij) 2 (kl) is no longer sufficient to remove out-of-space contributions from 
(142): we have alternatively referred to this new orbital set as the “tertiary 
virtual subspace” .la 
Let us assume that the occupied orbitals are collected in RAS I, and that 
if an electron occupies RAS IV, the determinant must represent a single or 
double substitution of the reference determinant. Out-of-space contributions 
arise if one electron occupies RAS IV and another electron occupies RAS I1 
or RAS 111: such strings are allowed, but the promotion of another electron Beyond RAS: More Flexible a priori CI Space Selection 

--- PAGE 81 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 223 
from RAS I results in a disallowed string Ip(Kp)) = kfllp(Ip)). Application of 
the other shift operator in the 01 equation, E:, can result in an allowed string 
Ip(Jp)) with (ij) 2 (kl) if the electron in RAS IV is moved into one of the lower 
RAS subspaces, as long as it occupies an orbital i > k. Thus it is necessary 
to include in the string space all allowed strings, plus the disallowed strings 
which have one electron in RAS IV and two electrons in (RAS I1 + RAS 111). 
Once these strings are included, the RAS u equations can be used for 01 and 
02. As in the standard RAS method, no out-of-space strings can contribute 
to u3. By definition, the out-of-space strings are not allowed to combine with 
other strings to form RAS subblocks of the c or u matrices. Alternatively, in 
some cases these out-of-space contributions might be dealt with by employing 
the (N - 2)-electron reduced space of Zarrabian et aZ.471217 (cf. section 4.5). 
4.9 Implementation of Determinant-Based Algorithms 
In this section we discuss some of the practical issues relevant to the actual 
implementation of the determinant-based CI algorithms. We also describe our 
experience with our own fully direct CI program, DETCI, which is capable of 
evaluating any CI wavefunction which can be formulated as a RAS CI, subject 
to memory and disk limitations. This program is based in part on the alpha 
and beta string formalism of Handy44 and the algorithms of Olsen et a1.46983 
It has been modified to allow more complex CI spaces, as described in sections 
4.8.3 and 5.4. 
Our program requires at least two memory buffers for CI vectors, where 
a buffer can be either the length of the entire vector, or a spatial symmetry 
block, or a RAS subblock. Using the fastest algorithm, the program also re- 
quires a smaller memory buffer to hold a portion of the CI coefficients in a 
given RAS subblock. An additional buffer the size of the largest RAS sub- 
block may also be required for taking transposes of the c subblocks if Ms = 0 
symmetry is employed (this is determined by the core memory option, and if 
possible the same buffer is used for transposes and gathered CI coefficients). 
For diagonalizing the Hamiltonian, we have implemented many of the iterative 
methods described in section 3.2. 
4.9.1 Graphical Representation of Alpha and Beta Strings 
As discussed in the previous section, it is necessary to have a method for 
numbering the alpha and beta strings and a reasonable way of grouping these 
strings together so that allowed combinations of strings can be determined a 
group at a time. Olsen et al. use a graphical method to compute string ad- 
dresses, and they group strings together by placing them on the same graph.46 

--- PAGE 82 ---
224 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
We have employed a similar method. 
The present approach is based on the work of Duch, who has describedz3’ 
the graphical representation of CI spaces in considerable detail. First, we 
consider the simple two-slope directed graphs (“digraphs”) which represent 
alpha or beta strings without consideration of point group symmetry. Figure 17 
presents a digraph representing all strings with five electrons in seven orbitals. 
Each string is represented by a “walk” on the graph, from the head (at e = o = 
0) to the tail (at e = Na/p, o = n). Moving straight down from vertex (e,o) 
to vertex (e, o + 1) indicates that orbital o + 1 is unoccupied in the current 
string, while moving down diagonally from vertex (e, 0) to vertex (e + 1, o + 1) 
indicates that orbital o + 1 is occupied. Each vertex on the graph is assigned a 
weight x(e, o), and each arc connecting two vertices is assigned an arc weight 
Y(e, 0) for the arc leaving vertex (e, 0). Since, in general, two different arcs can 
leave a given vertex, we write Yo(e, 0) for the arc originating from vertex (e, 0) 
which leaves orbital o + 1 unoccupied, and &(e, 0) for the arc which occupies 
orbital o + 1.t The index or address of a string or walk is obtained by adding 
weights for each arc contained in the walk, i.e., 
i=O 
where Li is the occupation (0 or 1) of the ith arc, and (ei, i) are the coordinates 
of the vertices crossed by La. The term X(La) gives the offset of a given graph, 
if more than one graph is employed. The relative index for a determinant in a 
block may be given by I(La, Lp) = Ia(La)Sp+Ip(Lp), where Sp is the number 
of beta strings in the block. 
There are several different methods for assigning the arc weights by which 
one evaluates the index of a string according to equation (144). Under the 
lexical ordering scheme, the tail (No, n) of an alpha string graph is assigned a 
weight z = 1. Other vertex weights are computed according to the recursive 
formula 
Using lexical ordering, typically all arc weights Yo(e, 0) are set equal to zero, 
and the arc weights Yl (e, 0) are determined according to x(e, 0) = z(e + 1, o + 1) + x(e, o + 1). (145) 
Yl (e, 0) = x(e + 1, o + 1) + z(e + 1,o) + . . . i- x(e + 1, e + 1). (146) 
Figure 17a features vertex and arc weights computed in this manner. A result 
of the lexical ordering scheme is that paths with a fixed upper part and an 
*This differs somewhat from Duc~,~~’ who sometimes uses Y(e,o) to denote the arc 
entering vertex (e, o) in reverse-lexical addressing. 

--- PAGE 83 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 225 
Figure 17: Alpha string graph for no = 5,n = 7. Vertex weights are de- 
termined according to lexical ordering, and arc weights are given so that the 
rightmost path has index zero. (a) All unoccupied arc weights Yo(e,o) are 
zero. (b) All occupied arc weights Yl (e, o) are zero. 

--- PAGE 84 ---
226 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
arbitrary lower part have consecutive indices. The particular choice of Y values 
above is appropriate if the rightmost path is to have an index of zero. The 
same effects can be achieved using 
Yl(e,o) = 0 
Yo(e, 0) = x(e + 1, o + I), 
as illustrated in Figure 17b. An walk has the same index in Figures 17a and 
17b. For instance, the walk ai,a{,a!,a?,a$, has an index of 5+4+3+2+2 = 16 
(equation 144) from Figure 17a, and an index of 15 + 1 = 16 from Figure 17b. 
In the so-called “reverse-lexical” ordering scheme, all upper paths for a 
fixed lower path have consecutive indices. Vertex weights are now determined 
as 
a(e, 0) = ji(e, o - 1) + z(e - 1, o - I), (149) 
where the overbar indicates reversed-lexical ordering. Figure 18a depicts a 
reversed-lexical graph with all non-occupied orbital arcs set to zero. The oc- 
cupied orbital arcs are computed as 
Yl(e, 0) = %(e + I,.). 
Figure 18b is the same except that now all occupied arcs have weights of zero. 
The non-occupied arc weights are 
%(e, 0) = ji( e, 0) + 3(e + 1, o + 1) + + . + 3(N - 1, o + N - e - 1). (151) 
Note that string indices for reverse-lexical ordering are not necessarily the 
same as indices for lexical ordering. For the string af,af,a~,a~,a~, considered 
previously, the index is calculated as 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 6 = 10 from Figure 18a, 
or as 5 + 5 = 10 from Figure 18b. 
The arc weights given in Figures 17 and 18 cause the rightmost path to 
have an index I(&) = 0. If we change the arc weights so that the leftmost 
path has index I(&) = 0, we obtain four more addressing schemes. The two 
simplest schemes for I(&) = 0 are 
Yo(e, 0) = 0 Yl(e, 0) = z(e, o + 1) 
Fl(e, o) = o Yo(e, 0) = 3(e - 1,o) (152) 
(153) 
where the overbars indicate that reversed-lexical vertex weights have been 
used. Alpha strings for 5 electrons in 7 orbitals employing these addressing 
schemes are depicted in Figure 19. 
If we add another coordinate I’ to each vertex, we can extend these simple 
digraphs to include point group symmetry. However, this procedure is not 

--- PAGE 85 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 227 
Figure 18: Alpha string graph for n, = 5,n = 7. Vertex weights are deter- 
mined according to reverse-lexical ordering, and arc weights are given so that 
the rightmost path has index zero. (a) All unoccupied arc weights &(e, 0) are 
zero. (b) Occupied arc weights Yl(e, o) are set to zero. 

--- PAGE 86 ---
228 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
Figure 19: Alpha string graph for n, = 5, n = 7, with arc weights determined 
so that the leftmost path has index zero. (a) Vertex weights for lexical ordering, 
and arc weights according to Yo(e,o) = 0, Yl(e,o) = z(e,o + 1). (b) Vertex 
weights according to reverse-lexical ordering, and arc weights according to 
Fl(e, 0) = 0, %(e, 0) = 3(e - I,.). 
0- 
1- 
2- 
3- 
0 
4- 
5- 
6- 
1- 0- 
1- 
2- 
3- 
0 
4- 
5- 
6- 
1- 

--- PAGE 87 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 229 
really necessary as long as strings with different irreps are placed on different 
graphs. These two-slope digraphs are actually simpler versions of the four-slope 
digraphs first used by Shavitt to compute the addresses of configuration state 
functions (CSFs) in the graphical unitary group appr~ach.~‘ The indexing 
scheme used by DETCI is the reverse-lexical ordering with all unoccupied arc 
weights set to zero, as depicted in Figure 18a. Olsen et a1.46 use the lexical 
ordering of Figure 17a. 
In order to make the CI coefficient matrix block diagonal according to 
irreducible representation, it is necessary to number the strings consecutively 
within each irrep. This is accomplished by grouping strings with the same 
irrep into the same graph. For RAS CI spaces, it is also useful to number the 
strings such that only certain subblocks of each symmetry block are nonzero. 
This is accomplished by forming a different string graph for each different 
distribution of electrons among the RAS subspaces; for example, all strings 
with irrep al having four electrons in RAS I and two electrons in RAS I11 are 
grouped together, whereas strings with irrep a1 but five electrons in RAS I and 
one electron in RAS I11 are grouped together in a separate graph. In this way, 
the allowed combinations of strings become allowed combinations of graphs, 
and each allowed pair of alpha and beta graphs becomes a RAS subblock. 
4.9.2 
In their full CI program, Bendazzoli and E~angelisti~~?~’ dispense with the 
graphs entirely and compute string addresses directly from their bit patterns, 
with one bit for each orbital; set bits (ones) represent occupied orbitals. Strings 
of N, ones and n- N, zeroes are a common representation of the combinations 
of n objects taken N, at a time, and there exist standard numerical methods 
of computing lexical addresses for such bit  pattern^.'^' 
Knowles and Handy present an explicit formula for computing a string’s 
address from a list of its occupied  orbital^.'^' They employ an auxiliary array 
defined according to Nongraphical Methods for String Addressing 
n-N+k>l> k;k< N-1 
Z(k,l) = l+l-N n>lzN;k=N-l (154) 
where k labels electrons, 1 labels orbitals, n is the number of orbitals, and N 
is the number of electrons (we have modified the equation so that electron and 
orbital numbering starts from zero). The address of a string is then computed 

--- PAGE 88 ---
230 
according to: C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
(155) 
i=O 
Unfortunately, generalizing this formula to assign consecutive indices to strings 
with the same irrep becomes complicated. Bendazzoli et al. note that, since 
their strings are generated in the desired order, they can write the string's 
address to intermediate arrays and thus obviate the need to compute string 
addresses on-the-fly. Such considerations are also true of Olsen's program and 
of ours, However, storing all strings with their single replacement information 
can require a very large amount of memory, as discussed in section 4.9.4. In 
this case, it becomes useful to compute string addresses on-the-fly as rapidly 
as possible. 
If only occupied orbitals are assigned arc weights in the graphical procedure, 
it is possible to obtain an equation similar to (155), but using the graphical 
numbering scheme instead of the Knowles-Handy numbering. This is easily 
seen by comparing equation (155) to equation (144) when only occupied arcs 
have nonzero weights: 
N,-1 
I&,) = X(L") + c Y(2, q$). 
i=O 
This method of evaluation can be very efficient if the matrix Y (with dimen- 
sion N, x n) is stored for each of the string graphs. The memory requirement 
for this approach will generally be manageable, and far preferable to storing 
the string replacement lists or Bendazzoli and Evangelisti's OV and OOVV 
 list^.^^^^^ In the worst case, each excited string would then require N, matrix 
lookups and (N, - 1) additions to determine its address. However, note that a 
single excitation changes the occupancy of perhaps one and at most two RAS 
subspaces. It can be seen from eq. (156) that the contribution of unchanged 
RAS spaces to the string address are constant and need only be computed 
once. Graphically, this means that certain RAS spaces are traversed by the 
same segment of a walk. Finally, unless fast access to the arc weights is re- 
quired, it is preferable to keep the arc weights and other graph information in 
a compact form which stores only allowed vertices. 
4.9.3 Example of CI Vector and String Addressing 
This section applies the CI vector and string addressing methods just discussed 
to the specific case of a CISD for H20 in a minimal basis. Assume that the 
calculation is performed in CzV symmetry, and that the core orbital has been 
frozen. The orbitals are then ordered according to Figure 20. Note that the 

--- PAGE 89 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 231 
Figure 20: Orbital ordering for minimum basis CISD HzO in CZ, symmetry. 
Table 6: Allowed strings for minimum basis CISD HzO in Cz, symmetry. 
Graph r NIIl Strings 
0 al 1 (0 13 5) 
1 al 2 (0 3 4 5), (1 3 4 5) 
2 a2 0 (0 12 3) 
3 a2 1 (0 2 3 4), (1 2 3 4), (0 12 5) 
4 az 2 (0245),(1245) 
5 bl 1 (0 1 2 4), (0 2 3 5), (1 2 3 5) 
6 bl 2 (2345) 
7 bz 1 (0 13 4) 
8 bz 2 (0 14 5) 
frozen core orbital is not assigned a number by DETCI because the frozen core 
electrons are treated implicitly (cf. section 2.4.7). 
The distribution of electrons among RAS subspaces can be determined 
simply from the number of electrons in RAS 111, since there are only two RAS 
subspaces in this particular example. For a given string, there can be 0, 1, or 
2 electrons in RAS 111, and since there are four irreps in Cz,, there can be up 
to twelve string graphs. For this closed-shell case, the same set of graphs can 
be used to represent both alpha and beta strings. Table 6 lists all 15 allowed 
strings. Note that some strings transform as a2 even though there are no a2 
orbitals; as a general rule for larger cases, strings are almost evenly distributed 
among irreps. The strings in Table 6 are listed in increasing index order. For 
the few graphs containing more than one string, it is straightforward to verify 
using the techniques of section 4.9.1 that the relative addresses within the 
graph are in the order shown if reverse-lexical ordering is used. 

--- PAGE 90 ---
232 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
Table 7: Single replacement list for the first string in minimum basis CISD 
HzO. Jg is the graph of the target string and J is the target string’s relative 
index. 
i j Jg J Sgn 
00 00 + 
11 00 + 
33 00 + 
55 00 + 
40 11 + 
41 10 - 
25 20 - 
23 32 + 
20 52 - 
21 51 + 
45 70 + 
43 ao + 
As discussed later in section 4.9.4, it is necessary to compute lists of all 
singly excitations from each string. These excitations can be written in the 
form la(Ja)) = sgn(ij)&$la(Ia)), and for each string la, the lists need to 
contain the address of Ja, the sign, and the pair of orbitals zj. The string 
replacement lists for string 0 are given in Table 7. 
Finally, it is helpful to show how this string ordering determines the ad- 
dressing of the CI vector. There are two restrictions on the pairing of alpha 
strings with beta strings: first, the direct product of the two string irreps must 
be the irrep of the electronic state of interest (al); second, the total number 
of electrons in RAS I11 must be two or less. Due to the arrangement of the 
graphs, these restrictions can be satisfied for pairs of graphs rather than for 
pairs of strings. Each allowed pair of graphs becomes a RAS subblock. Table 
8 lists the allowed RAS subblocks. An interesting feature of this unusually 
small CI space is that not all allowed strings contribute to allowed determi- 
nants: there are no beta strings which can be combined with alpha strings 
from graphs 1, 6, or 8 which give allowed determinants. 
4.9.4 String Replacement Lists 
One of the first steps in implementing Olsen’s algorithm is the construction of 
string lists which hold the information needed to generate all single replace- 

--- PAGE 91 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 233 
Table 8: Allowed RAS subblocks for minimum basis CISD HzO. 
Block a Graph p Graph Dets 
0 0 0 1 
1 2 2 1 
2 2 3 3 
3 2 4 2 
4 3 2 3 
5 3 3 9 
6 4 2 2 
7 5 5 9 
8 7 7 1 
ments for each string; for example, Ip(Jp)) = sgn(ij)k{l/3(lp)) in Figure 9. 
For each excited string, one needs i, j, (or a composite index ij), the string 
address Jp, and sgn(ij), which tells whether E{ sends p(Ip) into plus or minus 
@(.lo). The sign is most easily derived using the rules of second quantization, 
recalling that the phase convention is defined by always listing alpha/beta 
strings according to increasing orbital number (cf. section 4.2). Note that the 
equations require the inclusion of operators Eij, which might not normally be 
considered “single substitutions.’’ 
In the innermost loop of Olsen’s v3 algorithm, V(I) = CJ, F(Jp)d(l, Jp), 
the summation should be restricted to only allowed pairs of strings (I, Jp). 
If loops over graphs are introduced, then one loops over J, belonging to a 
given alpha string graph (J,”) and Jp belonging to a given beta string graph 
(J;), where (Jt,J;) is an allowed combination of graphs. Now the problem of 
summing over all substituted strings becomes one of summing over all substi- 
tuted strings belonging to a given graph. Thus DETCI divides the list of single 
replacements into multiple lists, one for each target graph. A counter array 
is used to store how many singly substituted strings there are for each graph. 
For a large number of graphs (there can be several hundred), this method of 
storage can be very memory intensive, since the number of pointers for each 
string is proportional to the number of graphs; however, this method also pro- 
vides very fast access to the relevant replacement information in the innermost 
loops. 
It is important to point out that the string lists can become very large if 
there are more than a few thousand strings. For a full CI, the number of strings 
is approximately equal to the square root of the number of determinants, so 
quite large full CI spaces can be described using only a small number of strings. 

--- PAGE 92 ---
234 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
Table 9: Number of strings and determinants for selected CI problems. 
CI problem Fzc Strings Dets Str/Det 
cc-pVDZ+ Ne full CI" 0 8 568 9 185 280 9.3 x lop4 
DZ H2O full CI 1 715 128829 5.5~ 
DZP H20 CISDTQ 1 10626 558 823 1.9~ 
DZP H20 CISDT 1 5 781 50 187 1.2 x lo-' DZ H2O full CI o 2 002 1002 708 2.0 x 10-3 
DZP H2O CISDITQlb 1 4 326 78 895 5.5 x lop2 
DZP HzO CISD 1 1221 2 349 5.2 x lo-' 
aUsing the basis set of Koch et a1.' 
bThe RAS I1 space consists of the 2b2,4a1,2bl, and 5al orbitals, 
However, it is perhaps not well appreciated that for RAS CI spaces, the number 
of strings can grow much faster with the number of determinants: this is 
illustrated in Table 9. Such considerations indicate that any method of storing 
the string replacement lists whose memory requirements are proportional to 
the number of strings (with a large coefficient, no less) is unmanageable for 
large-scale RAS CI procedures. 
If the number of determinants remains much larger than the number of 
strings for a given case, one might consider storing the string lists to disk and 
loading them as needed. Indeed, such an approach would probably work in 
conjunction with the n3 algorithm. However, this strategy is not amenable 
to the 01 algorithm as implemented by Olsen et ~l.,~~ because one must con- 
sider single replacements from all graphs which can be reached from the graph 
containing the strings 1,. It seems preferable to form the string replacement 
information on-the-fly. A prototype method for doing this exists in DETCI, but 
it is inefficient: walking down graphs to add up arc weights is rather slow with 
our current storage scheme for the graphs. However, if the arc weights are 
stored in a slightly different format, it is possible to compute string addresses 
much more quickly; indeed, it is possible to compute addresses a RAS space at 
a time, meaning that arc weight contributions from RAS spaces with fixed or- 
bital occupancies are constant. This strategy was discussed in section 4.9.2 and 
is currently being implemented in DETCI. Another option is to use an entirely 
different implementation for restricted CI where storage of string replacement 
information becomes a problem. Malmqvist et al.56 have implemented RAS CI 
using a split-graph unitary group approach, and this algorithm may be more 
efficient for CI spaces which are not close to the full CI. 

--- PAGE 93 ---
Configuration interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 235 
4.9.5 
Assuming that the string replacement lists are available in-core, the algorithms 
used by our program for computing az and a3 (simplified somewhat for clarity) 
are presented in Figures 21 and 22 for the case in which a is computed a RAS 
subblock at a time, where the loops over combinations of strings allowed by 
symmetry and CI space restrictions are placed outside the 02 and a3 subrou- 
tines. The symbol y in Fig. 22 represents an irreducible representation of the 
molecular point group. These are the same algorithms used by our program 
for full CI; if enough memory is available to hold a symmetry block of c and a 
in core, then the RAS subblocks are the same as the symmetry blocks for a full 
CI. Otherwise, one can use a larger number of string graphs and smaller sub- 
blocks. For M, = 0 cases, it is possible to compute only the lower (or upper) 
triangle of a, according to (119). Thus only one of each pair of off-diagonal 
subblocks is determined explicitly. For diagonal blocks, (119) is used to im- 
pose the restriction (ij) 2 (kl) in the evaluation of a3 (cf. section 4.4.2). In 
FORTRAN, presumably it is best to eliminate redundant subblocks from the 
upper triangle, since blocks with only a few rows will typically be found in the 
upper triangle (assuming that larger indices are assigned to strings with more 
electrons in RAS 111): these blocks do not vectorize well due to short vector 
lengths. In C, exactly the opposite holds: it is presumably most efficient to 
eliminate the lower triangle subblocks. However, it is also true that longer 
vector lengths require more time to set up the lists L, R, and Sgn. 
The signs are actually taken care of by very fast bitwise logic operations. 
02 is computed instead of a1 because the preferred direction of vectorization 
is reversed in c as compared to FORTRAN. In the present context, this means 
that the step [02(Ia,I0) = az(I,,Ip)+F(J,)*c(J,,Ip)] is performed with unit- 
stride access to 02 and c. Note that this is in fact a DAXPY operation, which 
could be performed by calling the daxpy function from the BLAS library. For 
the IBM RS/SOOO POWER2 implementation, calling the BLAS library from 
the a2 or a3 routines resulted in no real savings. In fact, this slowed down 
the 03 subroutine, presumably due to the overhead of placing the function call 
within nested loops. 
Note that the a2 routine is actually quite close to Olsen’s 01 routine (swap 
ping alphas for betas, of course), except that the adaptation to point group 
symmetry and RAS restrictions is now explicit. The o3 routine is also similar 
to Olsen’s (with alphas swapped for betas), although the intermediate vector 
F has been eliminated (see below). Note that this particular version of the a3 
routine takes advantage of the (ij) 2 (Icl) simplification possible for M, = 0 
cases; this restriction cannot be used for off-diagonal RAS subblocks if only 
unique subblocks of 0 are computed. Algorithms for 02 and a3 Used by DETCI 

--- PAGE 94 ---
236 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
Figure 21: DETCI algorithm for uz. 
Enter subroutine for block (I:, 1;) of o2 and block (Ji, I;) of c 
loop I, = 1, number of strings in I, graph I: 
zero F(Jp) 
loop over alpha string graphs KZ 
Kcnt = cnt(I,, KZ) 
Kidx = id~(I,, KZ) 
Kij = ij(I,, K:) 
loop K = 1, Kcnt 
K, = Kidx(K) 
S1 = sign associated with K, 
if (K: = Ji) 
Jcnt = cnt(K,, J:) 
Jidx = Zh(K,, Jt) 
Jij = Zj(K,, JZ) kZ = Kij(K) 
F(K,) = F(K,) + s1 * h(kl) 
loop J = 1, Jcnt 
J, = Jidx (J) 
S2 = (sign associated with J,) * 5’1 
ij = Jij(J) 
F(J,) = F(J,) + 0.5 * (ijlkl) * S2 
end loop over J 
end loop over K 
end loop over KZ 
loop J, = 1, number of alpha strings in Jt 
if (F(J,) = 0) skip to next J, 
loop 10 = 1, number of beta strings in I, graph 1; 
end loop over I, 4,, I,) = m.fIa, 47) + F(J,) * c(J*, 1,) 
end loop over J, 
end loop over I, 

--- PAGE 95 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 237 
Figure 22: DETCI algorithm for cr3. 
Enter subroutine for block (I:, 1;) of 03 and block (J:, J;) of c 
loop over ij 
if (y(i) 8 y(j)@ y(J;)8 ~(1;) # 0) skip to next ij 
jlen = formlist(I;, J;, ij, L, R, Sgn) 
if (jlen = 0) skip to next ij 
loop I, = 1, number of alpha strings in 1: 
loop J = 1, jlen 
end loop over J c’(L J) = C(L, L(J)) * S9n(J) 
end loop over I, 
loop Ia = 1, number of strings in graph 1: 
Jacnt = cnt(I,, J:) 
Jaidx = Zdx(Ia, J:) 
Jaij = ij (I,, JZ) 
zero V 
loop Ja = 1, Jacnt AND ((kl = Jaij(Ja)) <= ij) 
J, = Jaidx( Ja) 
Sl =sign associated with J, 
loop Jb = 1, jlen 
end loop over Jb VS = 0.5 * dij,,, * (ijlkl) * S1 
V(Jb) = V(Jb)+VS*c‘(J,, Jb) 
end loop over Ja 
loop Jb = 1,jlen 
end loop over Jb Q(&,R(J~)) =a3(fa,R(Jb)) + VfJb) 
end loop over I, 
end loop over ij 

--- PAGE 96 ---
238 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
The figures clearly indicate that an efficient algorithm should take advan- 
tage of the sparsity of F in both the u2 and u3 routines. Although it is possible 
to ignore this sparsity in order to obtain more highly vectorized algorithms, 
this results in a slower code due to the large number of multiplications by zero. 
Attempts to formulate the a3 algorithm as a standard matrix multiplication 
resulted in a program which was slower by a factor of at least four (and usually 
more) on the IBM RS/SOOO model 3CT. The reader may wonder whether fur- 
ther reductions in the overall operation count might increase efficiency: after 
all, formulating the innermost loop as a DAXPY requires a certain amount 
of overhead work (namely, the gather and scatter operations). Indeed, a very 
simple algorithm which performs the minimum number of operations has al- 
ready been presented in Fig. 8. However, there are a number of reasons to 
think that this algorithm should be less efficient than that in Figure 22 for 
workstation computers. One reason is that indirect addressing in the inner- 
most loop causes cache misses and thus longer waits for elements of c. Another 
is that the simple algorithm takes no advantage of the pipelining features of 
current workstations, discussed in section 4.3. For DZ H20 full CI (1 million 
determinants), using the algorithm in Fig. 22 instead of the simple algorithm 
in Fig. 8 results in a speedup by a factor of five on the IBM 3CT. However, 
it is also important to point out that the smaller block sizes in a RAS CI (as 
opposed to a full CI) mean that the payoff for vectorization is less. 
A few remaining comments should be made about our 03 algorithm in 
Fig. 22. First, note that the intermediate vector F has been eliminated. Stor- 
age to and retrieval from this array requires several extra operations, yet the 
efficiency of the DAXPY operation is not enhanced by the use of F, since F is 
sparse (the only work saved is for excitations which map a string into itself). 
Second, writing the innermost loop of this routine (and also of the o1 rou- 
tine) as a DAXPY is particularly efficient on the RS/6000 architecture, which 
performs each pair of floating point multiplications and additions in the same 
machine instruction, the floating point multiply-add (FMA). 
In order to gauge the efficiency of our new determinant-based CI program, 
several timing comparisons have been made between DETCI and the standard 
Schaefer group CI program GUGACI. Table 10 presents averaged CPU and 
total times for several full CI test cases. Both programs used the standard 
Davidson method, keeping on disk the c and u vectors for every iteration; 
this lead to noticeable 1/0 delays for some of the larger test cases. Our new 
program is also capable of using iteration methods which require fewer vectors 
on disk (cf. section 3.2). Although we do not have access to Olsen’s code, he 
has reported that his program takes about 40s per iteration for the 1 million 
determinant DZ H2O full CI ~alculation,2~~ whereas DETCI requires 30s per 
iteration on the same model workstation (IBM RS/SOOO model 590). 

--- PAGE 97 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 239 
Table 10: CPU and total times per iteration to evaluate several benchmark 
full CI wavefunctions using the IBM RS/SOOO model 3CT. Fzc/Fzv denote the 
number of frozen core/frozen virtual orbitals. 
Time/Iter (seconds) 
GUGACI DETCI 
Molecule Fzc/Fzv CSFs Dets CPU Tot CPU Tot 
DZ H2O O/O 256 473 1002 708 1430 1465 28 33 
cc-pVDZ+ Nea 0/0 2 083 968 9 185 280 13788 14007 282 532 
DZP C2 2/2 6 571 116 27 944 940 32489 34831 1329 3160 
Wsing the basis set of Koch et DZ H20 1/0 37353 128 829 77 79 33 
5 Applications of Highly Correlated CI 
Most studies limit the CI space to single and double substitutions from a 
single reference (CISD). Occasionally, when one reference does not provide a 
sufficient zeroth-order wavefunction, the multi-reference CISD method will be 
employed. The applications of such methods are too numerous to discuss here; 
their general performance has already been described in section 2. We consider 
studies which go beyond CISD for one or a few references; such highly corre- 
lated wavefunctions are useful when very accurate results are desired or when 
several electron configurations are needed for a qualitatively correct reference 
wavefunction (such as when multiple bonds are broken). We will limit our 
attention to methods which select the CI space in an a priori fashion based on 
the distribution of electrons among various orbital subspaces. 
5.1 Full CI 
The most highly correlated configuration interaction method is of course full 
CI, which solves the Schrodinger equation exactly within the space spanned 
by the single-particle basis set (section 2.1). Unfortunately, as explained in 
section 2.4.1, the full CI space grows factorially with the number of electrons 
or single-particle basis functions; currently, full CI is limited to very small 
molecules (one or two heavy atoms with a few hydrogen atoms) described by 
a basis set of doub1e-C or perhaps trip1e-C quality. Furthermore, errors due 
to the incompleteness of the single-particle basis set are generally more severe 
than those introduced by the neglect of triple, quadruple, etc., substitutions 
in the treatment of electron correlation. Hence full CI is useful primarily as 

--- PAGE 98 ---
240 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
a benchmark method for evaluating approximate treatments of correlation. 
Given their extreme computational requirements, it is perhaps surprising how 
many full CI benchmarks have been reported. Here we will focus primarily on 
the more noteworthy or more recent benchmarks, and on systems containing 
more than four electrons. 
The early (1980) full CI algorithm of Handy44 enabled Saxe, Schaefer, and 
Handy to obtain the exact variational solution for the ground state of H20 
within a modest doub1e-C (DZ) basis set; this represented the first CI wave- 
function to include more than one million determinants.'13 In 1983, Harrison 
and Handy used this same algorithm, along with the loop-driven graphical uni- 
tary group approach CI (LD-GUGACI) program of Brooks and S~haefer,~~ to 
report full CI results for H2O and NH3 with a DZ basis and for BH and HF in a 
double-C plus polarization (DZP) basis.38 These two studies, which also gave 
results for the CISD, CISDT, and CISDTQ methods, clearly demonstrated 
that triply and quadruply substituted configurations account for nearly all of 
the error in the CISD correlation energy (cf. Table 2). Moreover, by comparing 
to Harrison and Handy's results for H20, Bartlett, Sekino, and Purvis demon- 
strated that fourth-order many-body perturbation theory [MBPT(4)] performs 
poorly when both 0-H bonds are ~tretched,'~ even though it partially accounts 
for quadruple excitations. This occurs because the restricted Hartree-Fock de- 
terminant provides an inadequate zeroth-order wavefunction as the bonds are 
stretched too far from their equilibrium lengths, and it emphasizes the need 
for multireference approaches. 
The subsequent (1984) vectorized full CI algorithmlog of Knowles and 
Handy allowed Bauschlicher, Taylor, LanghoE, and others to carry out a se- 
ries of important benchmark calculations. In 1986, these authors, along with 
Partridge, presented full CI results for the Ne atom using a triple-C plus dou- 
ble polarization (TZ2P) basis set.233 Once again, the CISDTQ wavefunction 
yielded more than 99% of the basis set correlation energy; furthermore, the 
contribution of quintuple and higher substitutions decreased with increasing 
basis set size. Subsequent benchmark results using a DZP basis were pre- 
sented for HF and NH:!;234 H20, F, and F-;235 the 'AI-~B~ separation in 
CH2;236 the barrier height to the reaction F + HZ + HF + H;237 the lAl, 
'B1, and 3B1 states of S~HZ;'~~ the 2 'A1 states of CHZ and SiH2 and the 2A1 
and 2Bz states of CHg;239 the low-lying states of Cz;240 Nz, NO, and 02;241 
the CH3 and Be3.243 Bauschlicher and co-workers have also inves- 
tigated transition metals. They estimated the 5D-5F energy separation for 
the Fe atom using a 5s4p2dlf basis set,244 excitation energies and oscillator 
strengths for the 'D Rydberg series in the A1 atom with a 7s6p4d3f AN0 ba- 
s~s,'~~ the 3F-5F separation for the Ti atom, and the 4@-2A separation for 
TiH in a 5s4p3dlf/2s basis set.246 Illas, Rubio, Ricart, and Bagus used the 

--- PAGE 99 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 24 1 
Knowles-Handy program to obtain full CI energies for the first row atoms and 
their hydrides in 4s3pld/2slp basis sets; these benchmarks were used to eval- 
uate the CIPSI method219 and the performance of AN0 basis sets versus more 
traditional segmented basis sets.247 Casanovas, Rubio, and Illas have also per- 
formed full CI studies on the interaction of H atom with Cu5 and Ag5 cluster 
models to investigate the transferability of the correlation contribution to the 
chemisorption bond for different pseudo potential^.^^^ 
Several of these studies considered molecules at three geometries, with 
equivalent bonds simultaneously stretched to 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 times their 
equilibrium lengths; hence, approximate methods could be judged not only 
by what fraction of the correlation energy they recovered, but also by how well 
they paralleled the full GI potential energy surface. The MR-CISD method 
was found to parallel full CI very well, particularly when CASSCF orbitals 
are used and all configurations present in the CASSCF are used as references. 
More recently, these authors have used large basis set full CI benchmarks 
to examine core-core and core-valence correlation effects249 and to calibrate 
more approximate MR-CISD approaches for the dissociation energy of BH.250 
Many of these results are summarized in a 1990 review article by Bauschlicher, 
Langhoff, and Taylor." 
Most of the full CI studies just discussed involved GI spaces spanning tens 
of millions of determinants. More recent full GI algorithms, which follow 
Olsen et al. in sacrificing some degree of vectorization for reduced opera- 
tion COU~~S,~~~~~~~~ have allowed for CI spaces including hundreds of millions of 
determinants. Indeed, Olsen, Jmrgensen, and Simons reported a full GI calcu- 
lation on the Mg atom using a 5s3p2dlf AN0 basis and requiring more than 
one billion determinants; unfortunately, it was not possible to fully converge 
the wavefunction due to the extreme amount of CPU time required.83 The first 
converged full GI benchmark requiring more than one billion determinants was 
reported recently by Evangelisti, Bendazzoli, Ansaloni, Duri, and Rossi, who 
presented an out-of-core adaptation of their full CI program for distributed- 
memory parallel computers and used it to obtain the full GI energy of Be2, 
with all electrons correlated, in a 4s2pld AN0 basis set partially uncontracted 
to 9~2pld.~~ 
In 1995, these workers used an in-core version of this algorithm to resolve 
an uncertainty concerning the full GI energy of NH3 with an AN0 DZP basis 
set.50 Knowles and Handy had in 1989 presented an energy of -56.4236 f 
0.0001 hartree using their approximate full GI method which truncates the o 
vector; 665,247 of 209,626,425 determinants were treated variationally, and the 
convergence limit was estimated perturbatively.218 This value underestimates 
the importance of the large number of neglected determinants, as was first 
demonstrated by Povill, Rubio, Caballol, and Ma1rie11.l~~ The true full CI 

--- PAGE 100 ---
242 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
energy was shown to be -56.424007 hartree.50i80 The program of Bendazzoli 
and Evangelisti4' has also been applied to DZ Ha and N249 and to C18H18 using 
a simple Pariser-Parr-Pople (PPP) Hamilt~nian.~~ 
In 1996, Olsen, J~rgensen, Koch, BalkovB, and Bartlett presented DZP full 
CI results for H20 at three geometries, where all ten electrons were correlated. 
Although the basis set was not designed to describe core correlation, these 
results are valuable in that they are fully invariant to orbital rotations, whereas 
they would not have been if the 1s-like orbital on oxygen were frozen.22 As 
shown by Handy and co-workers,20 it is fairly straightforward (and valuable) 
to generalize a full CI program to produce many-body perturbation theory 
(MBPT) energies order by order. considered MBPT 
through 15th order and examined the convergence of the series as the two OH 
bonds are simultaneously stretched, causing the zeroth-order wavefunction to 
become progressively worse. In another 1996 study, Olsen, Christiansen, Koch, 
and Jprrgensen examined the convergence of MBPT for several small molecules 
using DZP and larger basis sets. These authors concluded that perturbation 
theory corrections grow with increasing basis size and that, remarkably, the 
inclusion of diffuse functions can cause the perturbation series to diverge even 
for well-behaved molecules such as HF.237251 Olsen's algorithm has also been 
used to provide benchmark full CI excitation energies for CH+;252 BH, CH2, 
and Ne atom;? H20, Nz, and C2;37 and H20+.22 
Most full CI studies have focused solely on energies. A few papers, how- 
ever, have presented full CI results for other molecular properties. In 1987 
Bauschlicher and Taylor presented full CI dipole moments and polarizabilities 
for HF, CH2, SiH2, and F- with a DZP basis.253 Moreover, Bauschlicher and 
Langhoff gave full CI equilibrium geometries, dissociation energies, and har- 
monic vibrational frequencies for CH, NH, and OH using flexible AN0 basis 
sets.254 The following year, these authors presented full CI and SOCI transi- 
tion moments for two transitions in CH2 and selected dipole and quadrupole 
transitions in Be0,255 and Bauschlicher presented geometries, frequencies, and 
the dipole moment for the '@ and 2A states of TiH.246 Later, Bauschlicher and 
Taylor also presented full CI transition moments for H2 and BH in a compar- 
ison of the length and velocity representations for the transition moment ,256 
Full CI transition moments and polarizabilities for CH+ have been presented 
by Olsen and co-~orkers.~~~ Koch and Bauschlicher have presented a method 
for computing analytically the frequency dependent linear and quadratic re- 
sponse functions for full CI wavefunctions; they have considered Be atom in a 
9s9p5d basis set and have reported transition energies and dipole moments for 
several states, the first polarizability at real and imaginary frequencies, and 
the static second hyperp~larizability.~~~ Bauschlicher et al. have determined 
the full CI isotropic hyperfine coupling constant for the nitrogen atom using Hence, Olsen et al. 

--- PAGE 101 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 243 
basis sets as large as 8~4p2d.'~~ Spin-orbit coupling has been investigated at 
the full CI level for CH2 by Vahtras et ul.259 and for LiBe by Marino et dz6' 
Researchers have even obtained exact full CI equilibrium geometries for a 
few polyatomic systems with a DZP basis: the linear transition state for the 
reaction F + H2 + HF + H;237 the systems H6, H$ and H$. He;179261 the 
X 'B1 and A 'A1 states of NHz;'~' BH 3; 391262 Hz;263 and the four lowest- 
lying states of methylenez62*z64 and NH$.265 For the latter four molecules, full 
CI dipole moments and harmonic vibrational frequencies have been reported 
at the full CI equilibrium The DZP full CI studies of 
methylene clearly demonstrate the need to use larger basis sets: predictions 
for the singlet-triplet energy gap236yz62*z64 are at least 2.5 kcal mol-' too large 
compared to experiment.z64 We have recently completed a considerably more 
challenging full CI benchmark study of the four lowest states of methylene 
using the more reliable TZ2P basis set.266 
In the past few years, full CI benchmarks have been used to calibrate meth- 
ods for systems featuring weak interactions. Woon has obtained the full CI 
well-depth, equilibrium separation, and harmonic vibrational frequency for 
Hez with basis sets as large as augmented correlation-consistent polarized 
quadruple-[ (aug-~c-pVQZ).'~~ In a subsequent study, van Mourik and van 
Lenthe used the full CI program of Harrison and Zarrabian47 to obtain dimer 
energies at two separate geometries using large basis sets including h-type po- 
larization functions and bond  function^.^^ One interesting conclusion of this 
study, which could only be determined using highly correlated wavefunctions, 
was that the usually-reliable CCSD method is unsuitable for obtaining accu- 
rate potential energy curves for He2. Other recent full CI studies have also 
focused on helium dimer,268-271 as well as the dimer of two H2 molecules268~270 
and the He-H2 system.268i269 Such benchmarks have been helpful in examining 
the problem of basis set superposition error.z7o 
5.2 Second-Order CI 
One important conclusion from the full CI benchmark studies of Bauschlicher, 
Taylor, Langhoff, and others in the 1980's is that the MR-CISD method based 
on CASSCF orbitals provides potential energy surfaces which accurately par- 
allel the full CI  surface^.'^^ 15,2341238-240,242,254 For example, the CASSCF MR- 
CISD method predicts singlet-triplet energy separations in CH2 and SiHz 
within 0.01 kcal mol-l and 0.03 kcal mol-', respectively, of the full CI re- 
sult~.~~~~~~~ The best results are obtained when no threshold is used for refer- 
ence selection: that is, when all CSFs in the CASSCF wavefunction are used 
as references. This CAS-ref MR-CISD procedure is intimately related1O7 to 
second-order configuration interaction (SOCI), which distributes electrons in 

--- PAGE 102 ---
244 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
all possible ways as long as no more than two electrons are allowed in exter- 
nal orbitals at once (of course, spatial symmetry and spin symmetry may also 
be imposed on the final N-electron basis functions). For closed-shell systems 
these procedures are identical, but they can differ for open-shell systems. In 
cases where all occupied orbitals which are correlated in the SOCI are included 
in the active space, one can guarantee that the SOCI space is generated by 
using as references all CSFs arising from CASSCF wavefunctions of all possible 
spatial syrnmetrie~.'~' SOCI wavefunctions are invariant to orbital rotations 
within the active space, whereas this is not necessarily the case for CAS-ref 
MR-CISD when the references are symmetry-restricted. In cases where there 
are "inactive" orbitals (occupied orbitals which are correlated in the SOCI but 
not included in the CASSCF), Bauschlicher has recommended that the SOCI 
be defined according to the RAS CI scheme, such that one places inactive or- 
bitals in RAS I, active orbitals in RAS 11, and external orbitals in RAS III;15 
this maintains the desired orbital invariance properties. This SOCI can alter- 
natively be generated an MR-CISD in which the references are now all CSFs 
arising from all CASSCF wavefunctions of every spatial and spin symmetry. 
The reliability of SOCI, coupled with its essentially a priori selection of 
the CI space, makes it an attractive alternative to full CI. Unfortunately, for 
reasonable active spaces the dimension of the SOCI grows very rapidly with 
system size and thus the method is applicable only to small molecules. Nev- 
ertheless, for quite a few molecules it is possible to use the SOCI method in 
conjunction with large one-particle basis sets and hence to obtain wavefunc- 
tions very close to the exact nonrelativistic Born-Oppenheimer limit. Below, 
we will attempt to give the reader a sense of the types of problems to which 
the SOCI method has been applied. Bauschlicher, Langhoff, and Taylor have 
already given15 an excellent review of the related CASSCF MR-CISD method, 
and we refer the reader to their article for a discussion of additional important 
studies. 
The SOCI method has been applied primarily to diatomics and triatomics. 
Two of the early applications of SOCI were studies of Be2 by Blomberg, Sieg- 
bahn, and ROOS~'~ (1980) and by Lengsfield, McLean, Yoshimine, and Liuag 
(1983). With only four active electrons, a SOCI for this system is identical to 
the CISD[TQ] method discussed in the following section. The Be2 molecule is 
challenging to theory because of the near degeneracy of the ls22s2 and ls22p2 
configurations in the the Be atom and because the bonding in the dimer is 
dominated by dispersion forces. The latter studyag used a 6s4p3dlf Slater ba- 
sis set to yield a SOCI dissociation energy of D, = 1.87 kcal mol-' (2.04 f 
0.21 kcal mol-l, including estimates of core correlation and basis set errors), 
in contradiction to previous coupled-cluster st~dies"~ giving D, 5 0.2 kcal 
mol-'; the experimental value274 is 2.26 f 0.09 kcal mol-', signaling a success 

--- PAGE 103 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 245 
of the SOCI method and a failure of coupled-cluster models which neglect con- 
nected triple substitutions. A SOCI study of the related Mgz molecule using 
large AN0 basis sets was reported275 in 1990 by Partridge et aZ. Other SOCI 
studies on the ground states of diatomic molecules include an investigation of 
the potential energy curves of NeN2+ and NeN+ by Koch, Liu, and Frenking,276 
and of Nz and 02 by Langhoff, Bauschlicher, and Taylor.277 The latter study 
used a 5s4p3d2flg basis and reported equilibrium bond lengths, harmonic vi- 
brational frequencies, and dissociation energies of (1.101 A, 2343 cm-’, 9.723 
eV) for Nz and (1.209 A, 1561 cm-’, 5.139 eV) for 02, in excellent agreement 
with experimental values of (1.0977 A, 2358 cm-’, 9.905 eV) and (1.2075 A, 
1580 cm-’ , 5.214 eV), respectively. The multi-reference Davidson correction 
for size extensivity (section 2.4.6) improves the SOCI dissociation energies but 
worsens the predicted bond lengths and vibrational frequencies. A subsequent 
study by Almlof et aZ.278 considered even larger basis sets (including i polar- 
ization functions), core-valence correlation, and basis set superposition effects 
in an investigation of remaining sources of error in the dissociation energy of 
Nz; their best theoretical estimate was within about 2 kcal mol-l, or 1% of 
the experimental dissociation energy. 
Several studies have used the SOCI method to describe excited electronic 
states of diatomic molecules. In 1988, Partridge et aLZ7’ reported SOCI po- 
tential energy curves for the A’ 5Ez and C” 511,, states of Nz; these results 
had important implications for theories of the N2 afterglow and for the first 
time allowed an assignment of the Hermann infrared system. Also in 1988, 
Bauschlicher et aZ.280 reported SOCI spectroscopic constants (re, T,, and we) 
for several low-lying quartet states of AlC; this study indicated that the SOCI 
results based on CASSCF orbitals optimized separately for each state were 
nearly identical to SOCI using a common set of state-averaged CASSCF or- 
bitals. Balasubramanian has used the SOCI method along with relativistic 
pseudopotentials to study diatomics incorporating elements below the second 
row of the periodic table. His work has included studies of the low-lying elec- 
tronic states of InSb;281 Ga2, Ga;, and Ga$;282 GeH and GeH+;283 WH;284 
GaH;285 TIH and InH;286 and GeCl.287 Another study by Balasubramanian 
considers the low-lying states of the transition metal hydrides YH-CdH.288 
The SOCI method has also been used for a number of triatomics, including 
the mu~h-studied’~~ methylene molecule (CHz). An early application of the 
SOCI method to methylene was presented by Saxe, Schaefer, and Handy,28g 
who used Handy’s 1980 string-based determinant CI program44 to obtain an 
estimate of T, = 10.5 kcal mol-’ for the singlet-triplet energy gap using a 
8s5p3d/4slp basis set. More recently, Bauschlicher, Taylor, and Langhoff have 
used the SOCI method in conjunction with a 5~4p3d2flg/4~3p2d AN0 ba- 
sis set to predictzg0 optimized geometries for the X 3B1 and ii ‘A1 states of 

--- PAGE 104 ---
246 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
CH2 of (1.079 A, 133.6') and (1.110 A, 102.0°), which compare to experimen- 
tally derived estimates of (1.0753 A, 133.93O) and (1.116 A, 101.8O), respec- 
tively. McLean et dZg1 used the SOCI method with a 4s3p2dlf/3s2p basis 
to obtain 37 energy points which were fit with a nonrigid bender Hamilto- 
nian model to yield y = 2985 f 20 cm-' and v3 = 3205 f 20 cm-' for the 
fundamental stretching frequencies, compared to experimentally derived val- 
ues of 2992 and 3213 cm-'. For the singlet-triplet energy splitting (Te), the 
5~4p3d2flg/4~3p2d AN0 SOCI estimate of 9.13 kcal mol-' by Bauschlicher 
et al.290 and the TZ3P(2f,2d)+2diff SOCI estimate of 9.02 kcal mol-' by Ya- 
maguchi et ~1.~~ compare very favorably with the best nonrelativistic Born- 
Oppenheimer-corrected experimental estimate of 9.372 kcal mol-'.264,292-294 
Yamaguchi et al. also reporta6 SOCI excitation energies for the 6 'B1 and i; 
lA1 states which will hopefully guide further experimental efforts. 
Among the numerous other studies of polyatomic molecules using the SOCI 
method, Balasubramanian has reported energies and optimized geometries for 
low-lying states of SnH2;'39,295 PbH2;139 GaH2, GaH;, GaH3, and GaH$;285 
YH; and ZrH$;296 ASH 2, ASH;, SbH;, and BiHzf;297 GeH2;139g283 HM 2, .298 
TlH2, TlH;, InH2, and InH$;286 and PH2, PH;, and PH;.299 Yarkony et 
al. have used SOCI wavefunctions as zeroth-order solutions in first-order per- 
turbation theory treatments of the full Breit-Pauli spin-orbit Hamiltonian; in 
this fashion, these workers have studied the spin-forbidden decay of systems 
including 2 211 HS2+,300 6 3Z: NO+,301 and zi 4Z- CH.302 SOCI has also been 
used to assess the quality of the CCSD(T) method for electron affinities,303 to 
obtain accurate barrier heights for the termolecular reaction of 3H2,261 and to 
yield transition 
Finally, we note that it may be advantageous to use natural orbitals (NOS) 
rather than the CASSCF orbitals usually employed in SOCI studies. Grev and 
SchaefeP have shown for a number of small molecules (NH2, CH3, SiH2, N2) 
that a SOCI procedure based on CISD natural orbitals yields energies which 
are very close to the CASSCF SOCI energies, even when several bonds are 
simultaneously stretched to twice their equilibrium length. Blomberg and Liu 
have also observed similar performance of MCSCF orbitals and SOCI natural 
orbitals for energies and transition moments of CH and CH+,138 although we 
note that CISD NOS are much less expensive to obtain than SOCI NOS. CISD 
NOS are also easier to obtain than CASSCF orbitals, and they are better suited 
to orbital truncation; that is, the energy lost by deleting a few of the most 
weakly occupied NOS will typically be smaller than that lost by deleting a few 
of the highest-lying CASSCF orbitals. This allows for an effective reduction 
in the number of determinants included in a SOCI wavefunction with minimal 
loss in accuracy. Moreover, the energy lost by deleting these weakly occupied 
NOS is primarily due to neglected singly and doubly substituted determinants 

--- PAGE 105 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 247 
which occupy these orbitals, and not to neglected triples, quadruples, etc.l6> l7 
This suggests a strategy of using a smaller NO basis to treat higher-than- 
double substitutions, and this idea has been implemented in the CISD[TQ] 
method described in section 5.4. 
5.3 Restricted Active Space CI 
As already discussed, many commonly encountered CI spaces can be formu- 
lated within the RAS CI scheme. However, at the moment our attention is fo- 
cused on CI calculations using the RAS CI program of Olsen and co-~orkers.~~ 
Examples of full CI calculations using Olsen's program have already been dis- 
cussed above, so here we limit our attention to truncated CI wavefunctions. 
The RAS CI method can be very valuable when used in conjunction with 
the multiconfigurational linear response (MCLR) method, which allows calcu- 
lation of excitation energies, transition moments, and second-order properties 
such as polarizability. In 1989, Olsen and co-workers compared MCLR and 
full CI results for CHf and found that for highly accurate results, it is nec- 
essary to provide more extensive treatments of electron correlation than the 
valence CAS. Furthermore, these authors found that the RAS method provides 
an accurate means of reducing the size of the CI space in these MCLR stud- 
ies. Jensen et al. were able to show that the RAS MCLR calculations which 
include dynamical correlation give very reliable frequency-dependent polariz- 
abilities for the nitrogen molecule.304 Sanchez de Merds et al. found that the 
polarizabilities of H20 and COZ obtained using the RAS MCLR method with 
polarized basis sets were within 5% of experiment.305 More recently, Sundholm 
and Olsen have used the RAS approach as part of a finite element multiconfigu- 
rational Hartree-Fock method for determining the atomic quadrupole moment 
of Ca (3d4s; 'D) and the electron affinity of the lS ground 
5.4 CISDTQ and CISD[TQ] 
Few studies have employed configuration interaction with all singles, doubles, 
triples, and quadruples (CISDTQ) because the number of triple and quadruple 
substitutions grows very rapidly with the number of electrons and basis func- 
tions (cf. Table 3). CISDTQ results are most commonly reported in benchmark 
full CI studies to indicate the fraction of the basis set correlation energy recov- 
ered by triples and quadruples.'7*22~39~80~234~241~264 Nevertheless, the CISDTQ 
method has occasionally been used for benchmarking in cases where the full 
CI was not technically feasible, because the CISDTQ results are expected to 
be very close to full CI for small molecules. For systems with eight electrons 
or less at their equilibrium geometries, the CISDTQ method recovers more 

--- PAGE 106 ---
248 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
than 99.8% of the correlation energy for a DZP basis set (cf. Table 2). One 
benchmark study by Lee et al. examined the effects of triple and quadruple 
excitations on equilibrium geometries, harmonic vibrational frequencies, and 
infrared intensities of several small molecules.308 A similar study by Scuseria, 
Hamilton, and Schaefer309 used CISDTQ equilibrium geometries and harmonic 
vibrational frequencies to evaluate the performance of the CCSDT method for 
several diatomic molec~les.~ 
Chemical applications of the CISDTQ method include the 1988 study by 
Scuseria and Schaefer310 on the barrier height for the F + Hz + FH + H re- 
action, which is very sensitive to the level of theory employed. By truncating 
the CI space at quadruples, these authors were able to increase the basis set 
from 28 functions (in Bauschlicher and Taylor's full CI to 47 basis 
functions and enabled them to consider the effects of correlating the fluorine 
2s orbital. Additionally, Tanaka and Nishimoto have used CISDTQ to ex- 
amine the reaction mechanism for 1,3 hydrogen transfer in excited states of 
f~rmamide,~~~ and Du, Hrovat, and Borden312 have used CISDTQ as part of 
a study on singlet-triplet gaps in diradicals. 
Multireference CISD methods generally offer a more economical treatment 
of the dominant effects of triple and quadruple substitutions and allow the 
use of larger one-particle basis sets. The primary disadvantage of MR-CISD 
compared to CISDTQ is that the choice of references (and truncation, if any, 
of the generated singles and doubles space) must be performed carefully so 
as not to bias the results. An a priori selection scheme for MR-CISD which 
has been investigated in our laboratory is the CISD[TQ] method,16 which se- 
lects as references all single and double substitutions in the active space. This 
is equivalent to a CISDTQ in which no more than two electrons are allowed 
into external orbitals, or to a second-order CI (SOCI) in which greater-than- 
quadruple substitutions have been eliminated. This method was used by Saxe 
et al. in a 1982 study of ethylene using a DZP basis and the shape-driven 
graphical unitary group approach (SD-GUGA) CI program.g1 The resulting 
wavefunction (spanning more than 1 million CSFs) was considered a bench- 
mark result. In 1992 study of NHz, CH3, SiHz, CZ, and Nz, Grev and Schae- 
fer16 found that the CISD[TQ] method provides results which are very close 
to SOCI when a single reference function dominates. A subsequent study of 
several other small molecules by Fermann et a1.17 reinforced these conclusions. 
Some results from these studies which indicate the ability of CISD[TQ] to par- 
allel the SOCI and full CI surfaces are presented in Table 11. The CISD[TQ] 
and SOCI wavefunctions were based on CISD natural orbitals, which perform 
as well as CASSCF orbitals for SOCI." Although the savings in the number 
of CSFs for CISD[TQ] compared to SOCI in Table 11 is relatively modest, 
this savings increases very rapidly with basis set and number of electrons: for 

--- PAGE 107 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 249 
Table 11: Errors in Total Energies (millihartree) Relative to Full CI for Several 
Molecules Using a DZP Basis." 
Method NO. CSFS E(re) E(1.5 *re) E(2.0 T,) 
2B1 NH2 (Ref. 16): 
CISD 898 9.003 23.475 69.168 
SOCI 21 687 2.853 2.107 1.703 
Full CI 2 435 160 0.000 0.000 0.000 CISD [TQ] 18 396 2.897 2.630 4.957 
2A; CHB (Ref. 16): 
CISD 1385 8.384 23.216 70.646 
CISD[TQ] 51 818 2.156 2.065 4.910 
SOCI 76 660 2.090 1.254 0.889 
Full CI 9 591 312 0.000 0.000 0.000 
'Al H20 (Ref. 17): 
CISD 926 12.851 30.421 75.644 
CISDTQ 151 248 0.397 1.547 6.280 
CISD[TQ] 32 361 1.630 2.537 6.867 
SOCI 76 660 1.276 1.058 1.020 
Full CI 6 740 280 0.000 0.000 0.000 
VISD[TQ] and SOCI methods employed CISD natural orbitals. 

--- PAGE 108 ---
250 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
DZP ethylene, a CISD[TQ] description requires over 1 million CSFs, whereas 
a SOCI requires over 42 million. In addition to these results, Grev and Schae- 
fer16 also demonstrate that the CISD[TQ] method yields reliable dissociation 
energies for the difficult N2 and C2 molecules. 
More recent work has explored the quality of CISD[TQ] equilibrium ge- 
ometries and harmonic vibrational frequencies. King et d313 have found that 
for HzO with a TZ2P basis, the equilibrium geometry predicted by CISD[TQ] 
differs from that of CISDTQ by less than 0.0001 A in the bond length and 
0.2O in the bond angle. Furthermore, the CISD[TQ] harmonic vibrational fre- 
quencies differ from those of the complete CISDTQ by an average of only 5 
cm-l. Such agreement is outstanding, particularly in view of the fact that the 
CISD[TQ] wavefunction contains 45 times fewer CSFs than CISDTQ. In re- 
lated work, Hoffman et aL314 have found similar results for H2S. Another study 
by Leininger and Schaefer315 considers the ozone molecule, which is challenging 
to theory because of the unusual importance of triple and quadruple substitu- 
tions. It is not currently feasible to obtain the complete CISDTQ wavefunction 
with a DZP basis, but the DZP CISD[TQ] equilibrium geometry differs from 
experiment by only 0.009 A, and the harmonic vibrational frequencies differ by 
an average of 2.4%, with the treacherous antisymmetric stretching frequency 
predicted within 4.5%. 
Finally, even though the computational cost of a CISD[TQ] procedure 
is substantially reduced compared to CISDTQ, the scaling with system size 
(cf. section 2.4.5) remains unfavorable. Hence, it is necessary to seek further 
reductions in the CI expansion with a minimal loss in the quality of the wave- 
function. One promising strategy was suggested by Grev and Schaefer’s 1992 
study16 on the use of CISD natural orbitals (NOS) in the CISD[TQ] and SOCI 
methods. This work indicated not only that CISD NOS are as effective as 
CASSCF orbitals at providing good correlating orbitals in the active space, 
but also that the most weakly occupied NOS contribute almost negligibly to 
the energy. Furthermore, the errors in the energy caused by deleting weakly 
occupied orbitals are almost entirely due to the neglect of singles and doubles 
occupying these orbitals, and not to triples or quadruples. This suggests a more 
compact CISD[TQ] wavefunction” which splits the external orbital space into 
two sets. If the unoccupied (virtual) orbitals of the active space are labeled the 
primary virtual subspace, then the external orbitals are divided into secondary 
and tertiary virtual subspaces, where the tertiary subspace comprises the set of 
the most weakly occupied NOS. One may then modify the CISD[TQ] method 
to eliminate those triple and quadruple substitutions which place an electron 
in one of the most weakly occupied orbital~.l~~~~*~~ In effect, one uses a larger 
basis set for the singles and doubles than for the triples and quadruples. 
This “split-virtual” CISD[TQ] method has been implemented in our de- 

--- PAGE 109 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 251 
Table 12: Correlation Energy Recovered (Relative to CISDTQ) by the Split- 
Virtual CISD[TQ] Method for HzO in a cc-pVTZ Basis Set." 
Method/ NO Number %SDTQ 
Secondary Space Cutoff of Dets Energy 
CISD 15 939 93.1 
CISDT 938 679 95.8 
CISDTQ 28 085 271 100. 
CISD[TQ] wf primary space 2bz4a12b15al 
(18 7 9 15) none 984 789 98.8 
(9 4 6 8) 320 531 98.6 
(3 1 12) 10-3 41 261 96.5 
"CISD[TQ] methods employed CISD natural orbitals (NOS). 
The secondary orbital space selects all virtual orbitals with 
NO occupation numbers greater than the given cutoff and 
is identified according to how many orbitals of each irrep 
of CZ, it contains, in the order (al, ag, bl, bz). Only 
valence electrons are correlated. (0 0 0 0) 16 713 94.7 

--- PAGE 110 ---
252 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
terminant based CI program (cf. section 4.8.3), and we have presented some 
preliminary resultsl8 for the neon atom and for HzO. Table 12 gives some of 
our results for H20 with a cc-pVTZ basis set. We find the NO-based selection 
scheme to be effective in obtaining the dominant effects of triple and quadruple 
substitutions while using fewer CSFs, and we believe this promising strategy 
should be even more effective in the coupled-cluster approach, where the con- 
nected triples (?3 operator) could be evaluated using a smaller NO space. 
Acknowledgments 
We thank Dr. Jeppe Olsen, Dr. Wesley Allen, and Matthew Leininger for 
helpful discussions, and Dr. Daniel Crawford and Dr. Justin Fermann for their 
work on the two-electron integral transformation algorithm. This work was 
sponsored by the US. National Science Foundation, grant no. CHI3-9527468, 
and by NSF graduate and postdoctoral fellowships (grant no. CHE-9626094) 
to C.D.S. 
References 
[l] J. R. Thomas, B. J. DeLeeuw, G. Vacek, and H. F. Schaefer, J. Chem. 
Phys. 98, 1336 (1993). 
and H. F. Schaefer, J. Chem. Phys. 99, 403 (1993). [2] J. R. Thomas, B. J. DeLeeuw, G. Vacek, T. D. Crawford, Y. Yamaguchi, 
[3] K. Raghavachari, G. W. Trucks, J. A. Pople, and M. Head-Gordon, 
[4] G. E. Scuseria and T. J. Lee, J. Chem. Phys. 93, 5851 (1990). 
[5] G. E. Scuseria, Chem. Phys. Lett. 94, 27 (1991). 
[6] J. F. Stanton and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys. 98, 7029 (1993). 
[7] H. Koch, 0. Christiansen, P. Jmgensen, and J. Olsen, Chem. Phys. Lett. Chem. Phys. Lett. 157, 479 (1989). 
244, 75 (1995). 
[8] B. 0. ROOS, The multiconfigurational (MC) SCF method, in Methods 
in Computational Molecular Physics, edited by G. H. F. Diercksen and 
S. Wilson, pages 161-187. D. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1983. 
[9] B. 0. ROOS, The multiconfigurational (MC) self-consistent field (SCF) 
theory, in Lecture Notes in Quantum Chemistry: European Summer 

--- PAGE 111 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 253 
School in Quantum Chemistry, edited by B. 0. Roos, volume 58 of Lec- 
ture Notes in Chemistry, pages 177-254. Springer-Verlag, New York, 
1992. 
[lo] R. J. Buenker and S. D. Peyerimhoff, Theor. Chim. Acta 35, 33 (1974). 
[ll] R. J. Buenker and S. D. Peyerimhoff, Theor. Chim. Acta 39, 217 (1975). 
[12] J. A. Pople, in Energy, Structure and Reactivity: Proceedings of the 1972 
Boulder Summer Research Conference on Theoretical Chemistry, edited 
by D. W. Smith and W. B. McRae, page 51. Wiley, New York, 1973. 
[13] H. F. Schaefer, Configuration Interaction Wave Functions and the Prop- 
erties of Atoms and Diatomic Molecules, PhD thesis, Stanford Univer- 
sity, Stanford, CA, 1969. 
[14] F. B. Brown, I. Shavitt, and R. Shepard, Chem. Phys. Lett. 105, 363 
(1984). 
[15] C. W. Bauschlicher, S. R. Langhoff, and P. R. Taylor, Accurate quan- 
tum chemical calculations, in Advances in Chemical Physics, edited by 
I. Prigogine and S. A. Rice, volume 77, pages 103-161. Wiley, New York, 
1990. 
[16] R. S. Grev and H. F. Schaefer, J. Chem. Phys. 96, 6850 (1992). 
[17] J. T. Fermann, C. D. Sherrill, T. D. Crawford, and H. F. Schaefer, J. 
Chem. Phys. 100, 8132 (1994). 
[18] C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer, J. Phys. Chem. 100, 6069 (1996). 
[19] R. J. Bartlett, H. Sekino, and G. D. Purvis, Chem. Phys. Lett. 98, 66 
(1983). 
[20] N. C. Handy, P. J. Knowles, and K. Somasundram, Theor. Chim. Acta 
68, 87 (1985). 
[21] S. A. Kucharski, J. Noga, and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys. 90, 7282 
(1989). 
[22] J. Olsen, P. Jorgensen, H. Koch, A. BalkovB, and R. J. Bartlett, J. 
Chem. Phys. 104, 8007 (1996). 
[23] J. Olsen, 0. Christiansen, H. Koch, and P. Jorgensen, J. Chem. Phys. 
105, 5082 (1996). 

--- PAGE 112 ---
254 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
[24] G. D. Purvis and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys. 76, 1910 (1982). 
[25] W. D. Laidig and R. J. Bartlett, Chem. Phys. Lett. 104, 424 (1984). 
[26] Y. S. Lee, S. A. Kucharski, and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys. 81, 5906 
[27] Y. S. Lee, S. A. Kucharski, and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys. 82, (1984). 
5761(E) (1985). 
[28] J. Noga and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys. 86, 7041 (1987). 
[29] J. Noga and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys. 89, 3401(E) (1988). 
[30] J. D. Watts, G. W. Trucks, and R. J. Bartlett, Chem. Phys. Lett. 157, 
[31] J. D. Watts and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys. 93, 6104 (1990). 
[32] H. Nakatsuji and M. Ehara, J. Chem. Phys. 98, 7179 (1993). 
[33] X. Li, P. Piecuch, and J. Paldus, Chem. Phys. Lett. 224, 267 (1994). 
[34] A. Balkova and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 7116 (1995). 
[35] X. Li and J. Paldus, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 8059 (1995). 
[36] T. van Mourik and J. H. van Lenthe, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 7479 (1995). 
[37] 0. Christiansen, H. Koch, P. J~rgensen, and J. Olsen, Chem. Phys. Lett. 359 (1989). 
256, 185 (1996). 
[38] R. J. Harrison and N. C. Handy, Chem. Phys. Lett. 95, 386 (1983). 
[39] J. M. Galbraith, G. Vacek, and H. F. Schaefer, J. Mol. Structure 300, 
281 (1993). 
[40] J. Paldus, J. Chem. Phys. 61, 5321 (1974). 
[41] I. Shavitt, Int. J. Quantum Chem. Symp. 11, 131 (1977). 
[42] I. Shavitt, Int. J. Quantum Chem. Symp. 12, 5 (1978). 
[43] B. R. Brooks and H. F. Schaefer, J. Chem. Phys. 70, 5092 (1979). 
[44] N. C. Handy, Chem. Phys. Lett. 74, 280 (1980). 
[45] P. E. M. Siegbahn, Chem. Phys. Lett. 109, 417 (1984). 

--- PAGE 113 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 255 
[46] J. Olsen, B. 0. ROOS, P. Jorgensen, and H. J. Aa. Jensen, J. Chem. 
Phys. 89, 2185 (1988). 
[47] R. J. Harrison and S. Zarrabian, Chem. Phys. Lett. 158, 393 (1989). 
[48] G. L. Bendazzoli and S. Evangelisti, J. Chem. Phys. 98, 3141 (1993). 
I491 G. L. Bendazzoli and S. Evangelisti, Int. J. Quantum Chem. Symp. 27, 
287 (1993). 
[50] S. Evangelisti, G. L. Bendazzoli, R. Ansaloni, and E. Rossi, Chem. Phys. 
Lett. 233, 353 (1995). 
[51] R. Shepard, The analytic gradient method for configuration interaction 
wave functions, in Modern Electronic Structure Theory, edited by D. R. 
Yarkony, volume 2 of Advanced Series in Physical Chemistry, pages 345- 
458. World Scientific, Singapore, 1995. 
[52] Y. Yamaguchi, Y. Osamura, J. D. Goddard, and H. F. Schaefer, A New 
Dimension to Quantum Chemistry: Analytic Derivative Methods in Ab 
initio Molecular Electronic Structure Theory. Oxford, New York, 1994. 
[53] R. Shepard, The multiconfiguration self-consistent field method, in 
Ab Initio Methods in Quantum Chemistry-11, edited by K. P. Lawley, 
volume 69 of Advances in Chemical Physics, pages 63-200. Wiley, New 
York, 1987. 
[54] H.-J. Werner, Matrix-formulated direct multiconfiguration self- 
consistent field and multiconfiguration reference configuration- 
interaction methods, in Ab Initio Methods in Quantum Chemistry-11, 
edited by K. P. Lawley, volume 69 of Advances in Chemical Physics, 
pages 1-62. Wiley, New York, 1987. 
[55] B. 0. ROOS, The complete active space self-consistent field method and 
its applications in electronic structure calculations, in Ab Initio Methods 
in Quantum Chemistry-11, edited by K. P. Lawley, volume 69 of Advances 
in Chemical Physics, pages 399-445. Wiley, New York, 1987. 
[56] P.-A. Malmqvist, A. Rendell, and B. 0. Roos, J. Phys. Chem. 94, 5477 
(1990). 
[57] I. Shavitt, The method of configuration interaction, in Methods of Elec- 
tronic Structure Theory, edited by H. F. Schaefer, pages 189-275. Plenum 
Press, New York, 1977. 

--- PAGE 114 ---
256 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
[58] P. E. M. Siegbahn, The configuration interaction method, in Lecture 
Notes in Quantum Chemistry: European Summer School in Quantum 
Chemistry, edited by B. 0. ROOS, volume 58 of Lecture Notes in Chem- 
istry, pages 255-293. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1992. 
[59] J. Karwowski, The configuration interaction approach to electron cor- 
relation, in Methods in Computational Molecular Physics, edited by 
S. Wilson and G. H. F. Diercksen, pages 65-98. Plenum Press, New 
York, 1992. 
[60] W. Duch, J. Mol. Struct. (Theochem) 80, 27 (1991). 
[61] R. McWeeny, Methods of Molecular Quantum Mechanics. Academic 
Press, New York, 2nd edition, 1992. 
1621 E. Schrodinger, Ann. d. Phys. 79, 734 (1926). 
[63] A. Szabo and N. S. Ostlund, Modern Quantum Chemistry: Introduction 
to Advanced Electronic Structure Theory. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1989. 
[64] W. Klopper, R. Rohse, and W. Kutzelnigg, Chem. Phys. Lett. 178, 455 
[65] R. D. Kent and M. Schlesinger, Phys. Rev. A 46, 6881 (1992). 
[66] W. Cencek and J. Rychlewski, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 2533 (1995). 
[67] B. J. Persson and P. R. Taylor, J. Chem. Phys. 105, 5915 (1996). 
1681 E. A. Hylleraas, Z. Phys. 54, 347 (1929). 
[69] E. A. Hylleraas, The Schrodinger two-electron atomic problem, in Ad- 
vances in Quantum Chemistry, edited by P.-0. Lowdin, volume 1, pages 
1-33. Academic Press, New York, 1964. (1991). 
[70] L. Pauling and E. B. Wilson, Jr., Introduction to Quantum Mechanics 
with Applications to Chemistry. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1935. 
[71] J. K. L. MacDonald, Phys. Rev. 43, 830 (1933). 
1721 E. A. Hylleraas and B. Undheim, Z. Phys. 65, 759 (1930). 
[73] W. Ritz, J. Reine Angew. Math. 135, 1 (1909). 
[74] J. C. Slater, Phys. Rev. 34, 1293 (1929). 
[75] E. U. Condon, Phys. Rev. 36, 1121 (1930). 

--- PAGE 115 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 257 
[76] J. C. Slater, Phys. Rev. 38, 1109 (1931). 
[77] P. 0. Lowdin, Phys. Rev. 97, 1474 (1955). 
[78] J. Paldus, Int. J. Quantum Chem. Symp. 9, 165 (1975). 
[79] J. Olsen, The method of second quantization, in Lecture Notes in 
Quantum Chemistry: European Summer School in Quantum Chemistry, 
edited by B. 0. ROOS, volume 58 of Lecture Notes in Chemistry, pages 
37-87. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1992. 
[80] J. Olsen, unpublished. 
[81] P. J. Knowles, Chem. Phys. Lett. 155, 513 (1989). 
[82] H. Weyl, The Classical Groups, Their Invariants and Representations. 
Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1946. 
[83] J. Olsen, P. JQrgensen, and J. Simons, Chem. Phys. Lett. 169, 463 
(1990). 
[84] S. Evangelisti, G. L. Bendazzoli, R. Ansaloni, F. Duri, and E. Rossi, 
Chem. Phys. Lett. 252, 437 (1996). 
[85] C. W. Bauschlicher and D. R. Yarkony, J. Chem. Phys. 69, 3875 (1978). 
[86] Y. Yamaguchi, C. D. Sherrill, and H. F. Schaefer, J. Phys. Chem. 100, 
7911 (1996). 
[87] P. G. Burton and P. D. Gray, Chem. Phys. Lett. 96, 453 (1983). 
[88] P. E. M. Siegbahn, The direct CI method, in Methods in Computational 
Molecular Physics, edited by G. H. F. Diercksen and S. Wilson, pages 
189-207. D. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1983. 
[89] B. H. Lengsfield, A. D. McLean, M. Yoshimine, and B. Liu, J. Chem. 
Phys. 79, 1891 (1983). 
[go] M. M. Steiner, W. Wenzel, K. G. Wilson, and J. W. Wilkins, Chem. 
Phys. Lett. 231, 263 (1994). 
[91] P. Saxe, D. J. Fox, H. F. Schaefer, and N. C. Handy, J. Chem. Phys. 77, 
5584 (1982). 
[92] B. Huron, J. P. Malrieu, and P. Rancurel, J. Chem. Phys. 58, 5745 
(1973). 

--- PAGE 116 ---
258 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
[93] S. Evangelisti, J. P. Daudey, and J. P. Malrieu, Chem. Phys. 75, 91 
(1983). 
[94] Z. Gershgorn and I. Shavitt, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 2, 751 (1968). 
[95] V. Sychrovskf and P. CBrsky, Mol. Phys. 88, 1137 (1996). 
I961 0. Goscinski and E. Brandas, Chem. Phys. Lett. 2, 299 (1968). 
[97] J. Cullen and M. C. Zerner, Int. J. Quantum Chem. Symp. 9,343 (1975). 
[98] J. M. Cullen and M. C. Zerner, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 33, 373 (1988). 
[99] W. Meyer, Configuration expansion by means of pseudonatural orbitals, 
in Methods of Electronic Structure Theory, edited by H. F. Schaefer, 
pages 413-446. Plenum Press, New York, 1977. 
[loo] P. E. M. Siegbahn, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 18, 1229 (1980). 
[loll H.-J. Werner and P. J. Knowles, J. Chem. Phys. 88, 5803 (1988). 
[lo21 P. J. Knowles and H.-J. Werner, Chem. Phys. Lett. 145, 514 (1988). 
[lo31 J. C. Greer, J. Chem. Phys. 103, 1821 (1995). 
[lo41 A. Bunge, J. Chem. Phys. 53, 20 (1970). 
[lo51 C. F. Bender and H. F. Schaefer, J. Chem. Phys. 55, 4798 (1971). 
[lo61 A. D. McLean and B. Liu, J. Chem. Phys. 58, 1066 (1973). 
[lo71 C. W. Bauschlicher and H. Partridge, Theor. Chim. Acta 85, 255 (1993). 
[lo81 E. R. Davidson, J. Comp. Phys. 17, 87 (1975). 
[lo91 P. J. Knowles and N. C. Handy, Chem. Phys. Lett. 111, 315 (1984). 
[110] E. R. Davidson, Configuration interaction description of electron corre- 
lation, in The World of Quantum Chemistry, edited by R. Daudel and 
B. Pullman. D. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1974. 
[lll] S. R. Langhoff and E. R. Davidson, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 8,61 (1974). 
[112] E. R. Davidson and D. W. Silver, Chem. Phys. Lett. 52, 403 (1977). 
[113] L. Meissner, Chem. Phys. Lett. 146, 204 (1988). 
[114] W. Duch and G. H. F. Diercksen, J. Chem. Phys. 101, 3018 (1994). 

--- PAGE 117 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 259 
[115] P. J. Bruna, S. D. Peyerimhoff, and R. J. Buenker, Chem. Phys. Lett. 
72, 278 (1980). 
[116] W. Kutzelnigg, Pair correlation theories, in Methods of Electronic Struc- 
ture Theory, edited by H. F. Schaefer, pages 129-188. Plenum Press, New 
York, 1977. 
[117] R. Ahlrichs, P. Scharf, and C. Ehrhardt, J. Chem. Phys. 82, 890 (1985). 
[118] J. A. Pople, M. Head-Gordon, and K. Raghavachari, J. Chem. Phys. 87, 
5968 (1987). 
[119] R. J. Gdanitz and R. Ahlrichs, Chem. Phys. Lett. 143, 413 (1988). 
[120] P. G. Szalay and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys. 103, 3600 (1995). 
[121] L. Fiisti-Molnhr and P. G. Szalay, J. Phys. Chem. 100, 6288 (1996). 
[122] A. Povill, R. Caballol, J. Rubio, and J. P. Malrieu, Chem. Phys. Lett. 
209, 126 (1993). 
[123] A. Povill, J. Rubio, R. Caballol, and J. P. Malrieu, Chem. Phys. Lett. 
218, 283 (1994). 
[124] J. P. Malrieu, J. P. Daudey, and R. Caballol, J. Chem. Phys. 101, 8908 
(1994). 
[125] D. E. Woon and T. H. Dunning, J. Chem. Phys. 103, 4572 (1995). 
[126] R. P. Hosteny, T. H. Dunning, R. R. Gilman, A. Pipano, and I. Shavitt, 
[127] V. R. Saunders and J. H. van Lenthe, Mol. Phys. 48, 923 (1983). 
[128] E. R. Davidson, Perspectives on ab initao calculations, in Reviews in 
Computational Chemistry, edited by K. B. Lipkowitz and D. B. Boyd. 
VCH Publishers, New York, 1990. J. Chem. Phys. 62, 4764 (1975). 
[129] M. Page, P. Saxe, G. F. Adams, and B. H. Lengsfield, J. Chem. Phys. 
81, 434 (1984). 
[130] F. W. Bobrowicz and W. A. Goddard, The self-consistent field equations 
for generalized valence bond and open-shell Hartree-Fock wave functions, 
in Methods of Electronic Structure Theory, edited by H. F. Schaefer, 
pages 79-127. Plenum Press, New York, 1977. 

--- PAGE 118 ---
260 C. 0. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
(1311 B. 0. ROOS, P. R. Taylor, and P. E. M. Siegbahn, Chem. Phys. 48, 157 
(1321 W. J. Hunt and W. A. Goddard, Chem. Phys. Lett. 3, 414 (1969). 
[133] C. W. Bauschlicher, J. Chem. Phys. 72, 880 (1980). 
[134] D. Feller and E. R. Davidson, J. Chem. Phys. 74, 3977 (1981). 
[135] E. R. Davidson, Reduced Density Matrices in Quantum Chemistry. Aca- (1980). 
demic Press, New York, 1976. 
[136] I. Shavitt, B. J. Rosenberg, and S. Palalikit, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 
Symp. 10, 33 (1976). 
[137] 0. Parisel and Y. Ellinger, Chem. Phys. 189, 1 (1994). 
[138] M. R. A. Blomberg and B. Liu, J. Chem. Phys. 89, 6870 (1988). 
[139] K. Balasubramanian, J. Chem. Phys. 89, 5731 (1988). 
[140] S. Diner, J. P. Malrieu, P. Claverie, and F. Jordan, Chem. Phys. Lett. 
2, 319 (1968). 
[141] J. P. Malrieu, The pcilo method, in Semiempirical Methods of Elec- 
tronic Structure Calculation, edited by G. A. Segal, volume 7 of Modern 
Theoretical Chemistry, pages 69-103. Plenum Press, New York, 1977. 
[142] S. F. Boys, Localized orbitals and localized adjustment functions, in 
Quantum Theory of Atoms, Molecules, and the Solid State, edited by 
P.-0. Lowdin, pages 253-262. Academic Press, New York, 1966. 
[143] S. Saeber and P. Pulay, Chem. Phys. Lett. 113, 13 (1985). 
[144] S. Saebm and P. Pulay, J. Chem. Phys. 88, 1884 (1988). 
[145] I. D. Petsalakis, G. Theodorakopoulos, C. A. Nicolaides, and R. Buenker, 
J. Chem. Phys. 81, 3161 (1984). 
[146] P.-k Malmqvist, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 30, 479 (1986). 
[147] R. Broer and W. C. Nieuwpoort, Theor. Chim. Acta 73, 405 (1988). 
[148] P.-k Malmqvist and B. 0. ROOS, Chem. Phys. Lett. 155, 189 (1989). 
(1491 R. J. Buenker and S. D. Peyerimhoff, J. Chem. Phys. 53, 1368 (1970). 

--- PAGE 119 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 
[150] W. D. Allen and H. F. Schaefer, J. Chem. Phys. 87, 7076 (1987). 
[151] G. Fitzgerald and H. F. Schaefer, J. Chem. Phys. 83, 1162 (1985). 
[152] T. J. Lee, W. D. Allen, and H. F. Schaefer, J. Chem. Phys. 87, 7062 26 1 
(1987). 
[153] S. A. Houlden and I. G. Csizmadia, Theor. Chim. Acta 30, 209 (1973). 
[154] M. Head-Gordon and T. J. Lee, Single reference coupled cluster and 
perturbation theories of electronic excitation energies, in Modern Ideas 
an Coupled Cluster Theory, edited by R. J. Bartlett. World Scientific, 
Singapore, 1997. 
[155] H. Nakatsuji, Chem. Phys. Lett. 67, 329 (1979). 
[156] H. Nakatsuji, Chem. Phys. Lett. 67, 334 (1979). 
[157] K. Andersson, P.-k Malmqvist, B. 0. ROOS, A. J. Sadlej, and K. Wolin- 
ski, J. Chem. Phys. 96, 5483 (1990). 
[158] K. Andersson, P.-A. Malmqvist, and B. 0. ROOS, J. Chem. Phys. 96, 
1218 (1992). 
[159] K. Andersson and B. 0. ROOS, Multiconfigurational second-order pertur- 
bation theory, in Modern Electronic Structure Theory, edited by D. R. 
Yarkony, volume 2 of Advanced Series in Physical Chemistry, pages 55- 
109. World Scientific, Singapore, 1995. 
[160] J. B. Foresman, M. Head-Gordon, J. A. Pople, and M. J. Frisch, J. Phys. 
Chem. 96, 135 (1992). 
[161] M. Head-Gordon, R. J. Rico, M. Oumi, and T. J. Lee, Chem. Phys. 
Lett. 219, 21 (1994). 
[162] J. F. Stanton, J. Gauss, N. Ishikawa, and M. Head-Gordon, J. Chem. 
Phys. 103, 4160 (1995). 
[163] D. Maurice and M. Head-Gordon, Int. J. Quantum Chem. Symp. 29, 
361 (1995). 
[164] D. Maurice and M. Head-Gordon, J. Phys. Chem. 100, 6131 (1996). 
[165] J. Wasilewski, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 36, 503 (1989). 
[166] K. Dowd, High Performance Computing. O’Reilly, Sebastopol, CA, 1993. 

--- PAGE 120 ---
262 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
[167] J. A. Pople, R. Seeger, and R. Krishnan, Int. 3. Quantum Chem. Symp. 
11, 149 (1977). 
[168] H.-J. Werner and E.-A. Reinsch, J. Chem. Phys. 76, 3144 (1982). 
[169] R. Ahlrichs, in Proceedings of the 5th Seminar on Computational Meth- 
ods in Quantum Chemistry, Groningen, edited by P. T. van Duijen and 
W. C. Nieuwpoort. Max Planck Institut, Garching, Munchen, 1981. 
[170] S. Wilson, Four-index transformations, in Electron Correlation in Atoms 
and Molecules, edited by S. Wilson, volume 1 of Methods in Computa- 
tional Chemistry. Plenum, New York, 1987. 
[171] M. HLer, J. Almlof, and M. W. Feyereisen, Theor. Chim. Acta 79, 115 
(1991). 
[172] M. Yoshimine, The use of direct access devices in problems requiring the 
reordering of long lists of data, Technical Report RJ-555, IBM Research 
Laboratory, San Jose, California, 1969. 
[173] P.-A. Malmqvist, Mathematical tools in quantum chemistry, in Lecture 
Notes an Quantum Chemistry: European Summer School in Quantum 
Chemistry, edited by B. 0. Roos, volume 58 of Lecture Notes in Chem- 
istry, pages 1-35. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1992. 
[174] B. Liu, The simultaneous expansion method for the iterative solution 
of several of the lowest eigenvalues and corresponding eigenvectors of 
large real-symmetric matrices, Technical Report LBL-8158, Lawrence 
Berkeley Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, 1978. 
[175] C. W. Murray, S. C. Racine, and E. R. Davidson, J. Comput. Phys. 103, 
[176] R. Shepard, J. Comput. Chem. 11, 45 (1990). 
[177] H. Dachsel and H. Lischka, Theor. Chim. Acta 92, 339 (1995). 
[178] J. H. van Lenthe and P. Pulay, J. Comput. Chem. 11, 1164 (1990). 
[179] Y. Saad, Numerical Methods for Large Eigenvalue Problems. Manchester 382 (1992). 
University Press, Manchester, 1992. 
[180] G. L. G. Sleijpen and H. A. van der Vorst, A generalized Jacobi- 
Davidson iteration method for linear eigenvalue problems, Technical 
Report Preprint 856, Dept. Math., Utrecht University, 1994. 

--- PAGE 121 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 263 
[181] J. M. Bofill and J. M. Anglada, Chem. Phys. 183, 19 (1994). 
[182] H. J. J. van Dam, J. H. van Lenthe, G. L. G. Sleijpen, and H. A. van der 
Vorst, J. Comput. Chem. 17, 267 (1996). 
[183] A. 0. Mitrushenkov, Chem. Phys. Lett. 217, 559 (1994). 
[184] C. Ribbing and C. Daniel, J. Chem. Phys. 100, 6591 (1994). 
[185] R. Pauncz, Spin Eigenfunctions: Construction and Use. Plenum, New 
York, 1979. 
[186] R. Pauncz, The Symmetric Group in Quantum Chemistry. CRC Press, 
Boca Raton, 1995. 
[187] W. Duch, Chem. Phys. Lett. 162, 56 (1989). 
[188] W. Duch and J. Meller, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 50, 243 (1994). 
[189] T. J. Martinez, A. Mehta, and E. A. Carter, J. Chem. Phys. 97, 1876 
(1992). 
[190] T. J. Martinez, A. Mehta, and E. A. Carter, J. Chem. Phys. 99, 4238(E) 
(1993). 
[191] T. J. Martinez and E. A. Carter, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 7564 (1995). 
[192] G. Reynolds, T. J. Martinez, and E. A. Carter, J. Chem. Phys. 105, 
6455 (1996). 
[193] B. ROOS, Chem. Phys. Lett. 15, 153 (1972). 
[194] P. E. M. Siegbahn, J. Chem. Phys. 72, 1647 (1980). 
[195] P. E. M. Siegbahn, J. Chem. Phys. 70, 5391 (1979). 
[196] H. Lischka, R. Shepard, F. B. Brown, and I. Shavitt, Int. J. Quantum 
Chem. Symp. 15, 91 (1981). 
[197] M. Schiiler, T. Kovar, H. Lischka, R. Shepard, and R. J. Harrison, Theor. 
Chim. Acta 84, 489 (1993). 
[198] H. Dachsel, H. Lischka, R. Shepard, J. Nieplocha, and R. J. Harrison, J. 
Comput. Chem. 18, 430 (1997). 
[199] W. Duch and J. Karwowski, Computer Phys. Rept. 2, 93 (1985). 

--- PAGE 122 ---
264 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
[200] W. Duch, Chem. Phys. Lett. 124, 442 (1986). 
[201] A. Guldberg, S. Rettrup, G. L. Bendazzoli, and P. Palmieri, Int. J. 
Quantum Chem. Symp. 21, 513 (1987). 
[202] W. Duch and J. Karwowski, Theor. Chim. Acta 71, 187 (1987). 
[203] W. Duch, Int. J. Quantum Chem. Symp. 234, 683 (1990). 
[204] N. Flocke, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 61, 747 (1997). 
[205] M. W. Lucht, Phys. Rev. A 54, 266 (1996). 
[206] R. D. Kent and M. Schlesinger, Phys. Rev. A 50, 186 (1994). 
[207] Z. Wen, Y. Wang, and H. Lin, Chem. Phys. Lett. 230, 41 (1994). 
[208] M. D. Gould and J. S. Battle, J. Chem. Phys. 99, 5961 (1993). 
[209] M. D. Gould and J. S. Battle, J. Chem. Phys. 99, 5983 (1993). 
[210] R. D. Kent, M. Schlesinger, and I. Shavitt, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 41, 
89 (1992). 
[211] P. J. Burton and M. D. Gould, J. Chem. Phys. 96, 5261 (1992). 
[212] B. Jeziorski, J. Paldus, and P. Jankowski, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 56, 
129 (1995). 
[213] P. Saxe, H. F. Schaefer, and N. C. Handy, Chem. Phys. Lett. 79, 202 
(1981). 
[214] P. J. Knowles and N. C. Handy, Computer Phys. Commun. 54, 75 
(1989). 
[215] A. Povill, J. Rubio, and F. Illas, Theor. Chim. Acta 82, 229 (1992). 
[216] A. 0. Mitrushenkov and Y. Y. Dmitriev, Chem. Phys. Lett. 235, 410 
(1995). 
[217] S. Zarrabian, C. R. Sarma, and J. Paldus, Chem. Phys. Lett. 155, 183 
(1989). 
[218] P. J. Knowles and N. C. Handy, J. Chem. Phys. 91, 2396 (1989). 
[219] F. Illas, J. Rubio, J. M. Ricart, and P. S. Bagus, J. Chem. Phys. 95, 
1877 (1991). 

--- PAGE 123 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 265 
[220] A. Povill and J. Rubio, Theor. Chim. Acta 92, 305 (1995). 
[221] R. Caballol and J. P. Malrieu, Chem. Phys. Lett. 188, 543 (1992). 
[222] S. Krebs and R. J. Buenker, J. Chem. Phys. 103, 5613 (1995). 
[223] R. J. Harrison, J. Chem. Phys. 94, 5021 (1991). 
[224] A. V. Luzanov, A. L. Wulfov, and V. 0. Krouglov, Chem. Phys. Lett. 
197, 614 (1992). 
(2251 A. L. Wulfov, Chem. Phys. Lett. 255, 300 (1996). 
[226] A. 0. Mitrushenkov, J. Chem. Phys. 105, 10487 (1996). 
[227] R. J. Cave, S. S. Xantheas, and D. Feller, Theor. Chim. Acta 83, 31 
[228] A. L. Wulfov, Chem. Phys. Lett. 263, 79 (1996). 
[229] M. L. Leininger, C. D. Sherrill, W. D. Allen, and H. F. Schaefer, (1992). 
manuscript in preparation. 
[230] W. Duch, GRMS or Graphical Representation of Model Spaces, volume 1. 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1986. 
[231] D. H. Lehmer, in Applied Combinatorial Mathematics, edited by E. F. 
Beckenbach. Wiley, New York, 1964. 
[232] J. Olsen, Private communication, 1995. 
[233] C. W. Bauschlicher, S. R. Langhoff, P. R. Taylor, and H. Partridge, 
[234] C. W. Bauschlicher, S. R. Langhoff, P. R. Taylor, N. C. Handy, and P. J. 
12351 C. W. Bauschlicher and P. R. Taylor, J. Chem. Phys. 85, 2779 (1986). 
[236] C. W. Bauschlicher and P. R. Taylor, J. Chem. Phys. 85, 6510 (1986). 
[237] C. W. Bauschlicher and P. R. Taylor, J. Chem. Phys. 86, 858 (1987). 
[238] C. W. Bauschlicher and P. R. Taylor, J. Chem. Phys. 86, 1420 (1987). 
[239] C. W. Bauschlicher and P. R. Taylor, J. Chem. Phys. 87, 2844 (1987). 
[240] C. W. Bauschlicher and S. R. Langhoff, J. Chem. Phys. 87, 2919 (1987). Chem. Phys. Lett. 126, 436 (1986). 
Knowles, J. Chem. Phys. 85, 1469 (1986). 

--- PAGE 124 ---
266 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
[241] C. W. Bauschlicher and S. R. Langhoff, J. Chem. Phys. 86,5595 (1987). 
[242] C. W. Bauschlicher and P. R. Taylor, J. Chem. Phys. 86, 5600 (1987). 
[243] J. D. Watts, I. Cernusak, J. Noga, R. J. Bartlett, C. W. Bauschlicher, 
T. J. Lee, A. P. Rendell, and P. R. Taylor, J. Chem. Phys. 93, 8875 
(1990). 
[244] C. W. Bauschlicher, J. Chem. Phys. 86, 5591 (1987). 
[245] P. R. Taylor, C. W. Bauschlicher, and S. R. Langhoff, J. Phys. B 21, 
L333 (1988). 
[246] C. W. Bauschlicher, J. Phys. Chem. 92, 3020 (1988). 
[247] F. Illas, J. M. Ricart, J. Rubio, and P. S. Bagus, J. Chem. Phys. 93, 
4982 (1990). 
[248] J. Casanovas, J. Rubio, and F. Illas, Chem. Phys. Lett. 180, 578 (1991). 
[249] C. W. Bauschlicher, S. R. Langhoff, and P. R. Taylor, J. Chem. Phys. 
88, 2540 (1988). 
[250] C. W. Bauschlicher, S. R. Langhoff, and P. R. Taylor, J. Chem. Phys. 
[251] 0. Christiansen, J. Olsen, P. J~rgensen, H. Koch, and P.-A. Malmqvist, 93, 502 (1990). 
Chem. Phys. Lett. 261, 369 (1996). 
[252] J. Olsen, A. M. Sainchez de Meras, H. J. Aa. Jensen, and P. Jgrgensen, 
Chem. Phys. Lett. 154, 380 (1989). 
[253] C. W. Bauschlicher and P. R. Taylor, Theor. Chim. Acta 71, 263 (1987). 
[254] C. W. Bauschlicher and S. R. Langhoff, Chem. Phys. Lett. 135, 67 
[255] C. W. Bauschlicher and S. R. Langhoff, Theor. Chim. Acta 73,43 (1988). 
[256] C. W. Bauschlicher and S. R. Langhoff, Theor. Chim. Acta 79,93 (1991). 
[257] H. Koch and R. J. Harrison, J. Chem. Phys. 95, 7479 (1991). 
[258] C. W. Bauschlicher, S. R. Langhoff, H. Partridge, and D. P. Chong, J. (1987). 
Chem. Phys. 89, 2985 (1988). 

--- PAGE 125 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 267 
[259] 0. Vahtras, H. Wgren, P. Jorgensen, H. J. A. Jensen, T. Helgaker, and 
J. Olsen, J. Chem. Phys. 96, 2118 (1992). 
[260] M. M. Marino, W. C. Ermler, C. W. Kern, and V. E. Bondybey, J. 
Chem. Phys. 96, 3756 (1992). 
[261] P. R. Taylor, A. Komornicki, and D. A. Dixon, J. Am. Chem. SOC. 111, 
1259 (1988). 
[262] J. M. Anglada and J. M. Bofill, Theor. Chim. Acta 92, 369 (1995). 
[263] Y. Yamaguchi, J. F. Gaw, R. B. Remington, and H. F. Schaefer, J. 
Chem. Phys. 86, 5072 (1987). 
[264] C. D. Sherrill, T. J. Van Huis, Y. Yamaguchi, and H. F. Schaefer, J. 
Mol. Struct. (Theochem) 400, 139 (1997). 
[265] T. J. Van Huis, M. L. Leininger, C. D. Sherrill, and H. F. Schaefer, 
manuscript in preparation. 
[266] C. D. Sherrill, M. L. Leininger, T. J. Van Huis, and H. F. Schaefer, J. 
Chem. Phys., submitted. 
I2671 D. E. Woon, J. Chem. Phys. 100, 2838 (1994). 
[268] R. Moszynski, B. Jeziorski, A. Ratkiewicz, and S. Rybak, J. Chem. Phys. 
99, 8856 (1993). 
[269] R. Moszynski, B. Jeziorski, and K. Szalewicz, J. Chem. Phys. 100, 1312 
(1994). 
[270] I. Mayer, A. Vibok, and P. Valiron, Chem. Phys. Lett. 224, 166 (1994). 
[271] J. V. Burda, R. Zahradnik, P. Hobza, and M. Urban, Mol. Phys. 89, 
425 (1996). 
[272] M. R. A. Blomberg, P. E. M. Siegbahn, and B. 0. ROOS, Int. J. Quantum 
Chem. Symp. 14, 229 (1980). 
[273] R. A. Chiles and C. E. Dykstra, J. Chem. Phys. 74, 4544 (1981). 
[274] V. E. Bondybey, Chem. Phys. Lett. 109, 436 (1984). 
[275] H. Partridge, C. W. Bauschlicher, L. G. M. Pettersson, A. D. McLean, 
B. Liu, M. Yoshimine, and A. Komornicki, J. Chem. Phys. 92, 5377 
(1990). 

--- PAGE 126 ---
268 C. D. Sherrill and H. F. Schaefer 111 
[276] W. Koch, B. Liu, and G. Frenking, J. Chem. Phys. 92, 2464 (1990). 
[277] S. R. Langhoff, C. W. Bauschlicher, and P. R. Taylor, Chem. Phys. Lett. 
[278] J. Almlof, B. J. DeLeeuw, P. R. Taylor, C. W. Bauschlicher, and P. Sieg- 135, 543 (1987). 
bahn; Int. J. Quantum Chem. Symp. 23, 345 (1989). 
[279] H. Partridge, S. R. Langhoff, C. W. Bauschlicher, and D. W. Schwenke, 
J. Chem. Phys. 88, 3174 (1988). 
[280] C. W. Bauschlicher, S. R. Langhoff, and L. G. M. Pettersson, J. Chem. 
[a811 K. Balasubramanian, J. Chem. Phys. 93, 507 (1990). 
[282] K. Balasubramanian, J. Phys. Chem. 94, 7764 (1990). 
[283] K. K. Das and K. Balasubramanian, J. Chem. Phys. 93, 5883 (1990). 
[284] Z. Ma and K. Balasubramanian, Chem. Phys. Lett. 181, 467 (1991). 
(2851 K. Balasubramanian, Chem. Phys. Lett. 164, 231 (1989). 
[286] K. Balasubramanian and J. X. Tao, J. Chem. Phys. 94, 3000 (1991) 
[287] D.-W. Liao and K. Balasubramanian, Phys. 89, 5747 (1988). 
Chem. Phys. Lett. 213, 174 
(1993). 
[288] K. Balasubramanian, J. Chem. Phys. 93, 8061 (1990). 
[289] P. Saxe, H. F. Schaefer, and N. C. Handy, J. Phys. Chem. 85, 745 (1981). 
[290] C. W. Bauschlicher, S. R. Langhoff, and P. R. Taylor, J. Chem. Phys. 
87, 387 (1987). 
[291] A. D. McLean, P. R. Bunker, R. M. Escribano, and P. Jensen, J. Chem. 
Phys. 87, 2166 (1987). 
[292] P. Jensen and P. R. Bunker, J. Chem. Phys. 89, 1327 (1988). 
[293] E. R. Davidson, D. Feller, and P. Phillips, Chem. Phys. Lett. 76, 416 
(1980). 
[294] N. C. Handy, Y. Yamaguchi, and H. F. Schaefer, J. Chem. Phys. 84, 
4481 (1986). 

--- PAGE 127 ---
Configuration Interaction Method: Advances in Highly Correlated Approaches 
[295] K. Balasubramanian, Chem. Phys. Lett. 127, 585 (1986). 
[296] K. K. Das and K. Balasubramanian, J. Chem. Phys. 91, 2433 (1989). 
[297] K. Balasubramanian, J. Chem. Phys. 91, 2443 (1989). 
[298] K. K. Das and K. Balasubramanian, J. Phys. Chem. 95, 3979 (1991). 
[299] K. Balasubramanian, Chem. Phys. Lett. 204, 601 (1993). 
[300] G. Parlant, J. Senekowitsch, S. V. ONeil, and D. R. Yarkony, J. Chem. 
[301] M. R. Manaa and D. R. Yarkony, J. Chem. Phys. 95, 6562 (1991). 
[302] H. Hettema and D. R. Yarkony, J. Chem. Phys. 100, 8991 (1994). 
[303] D. L. Strout and G. E. Scuseria, J. Chem. Phys. 96, 9025 (1992). 
[304] H. J. Aa. Jensen, P. J~rgensen, T. Helgaker, and J. Olsen, Chem. Phys. 
[305] A. M. SBnchez de Meras, H. J. Aa. Jensen, P. Jmrgensen, and J. Olsen, 
[306] D. Sundholm and J. Olsen, Chem. Phys. Lett. 198, 526 (1992). 
[307] D. Sundholm and J. Olsen, Chem. Phys. Lett. 217, 451 (1994). 
[308] T. J. Lee, R. B. Remington, Y. Yamaguchi, and H. F. Schaefer, J. Chem. 
[309] G. E. Scuseria, T. P. Hamilton, and H. F. Schaefer, J. Chem. Phys. 92, 
[310] G. E. Scuseria and H. F. Schaefer, J. Chem. Phys. 88, 7024 (1988). 
[311) H. Tanakaand K. Nishimoto, 3. Mol. Struct. (Theochem) 50,297 (1988). 
[312] P. Du, D. A. Hrovat, and W. T. Borden, J. Am. Chem. SOC. 108, 8086 269 
Phys. 94, 7208 (1991). 
Lett. 162, 355 (1989). 
Chem. Phys. Lett. 186, 379 (1991). 
Phys. 89, 408 (1988). 
568 (1990). 
(1986). 
[313] R. A. King, C. D. Sherrill, and H. F. Schaefer, Spectrochim. Acta, Part 
A 53, 1163 (1997). 
[314] B. C. Hoffman, C. D. Sherrill, and H. F. Schaefer, Chem. Phys. Lett. , 
submitted. 
[315] M. L. Leininger and H. F. Schaefer, J. Chem. Phys., in press. 
